Kenya | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Kenya At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? No Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? No Legal Gender Recognition Possible? No LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? No Last Update: March 12, 2026 Notable progress has been made in the recognition of the human rights of LGBTIQ people in Kenya in the last decade, largely through victories in the courts. In 2018, the Court of Appeal in Mombasa ruled that forced anal testing was unconstitutional, and in 2024, the petitioners in that case were awarded compensation . In 2023, the Supreme Court of Kenya upheld the decision of the lower courts in a judgment that safeguarded the freedom of association of LGBTQ organizations by allowing them to officially register. This progressive judgment was followed by heightened pushback , including protests in several counties and increased homophobic remarks by religious and political leaders . In response to a series of homophobic protests and remarks, the Centre for Minority Rights and Strategic Litigation filed a petition to compel the respondents to stop inciting hatred and discrimination against LGBTIQ persons. In 2024, the High Court in Mombasa issued a temporary order in favor of the petitioners. The matter is yet to proceed to a full hearing. In 2025, rights-affirming judgments were issued in two cases. The High Court in Eldoret ruled in favor of a trans petitioner who faced arbitrary arrest and degrading treatment in prison. The court awarded the petitioner damages, ordered the prisons and police to make physical and structural provisions to accommodate persons of the third gender in custody, and ordered the government to offer legal gender recognition and enact a Transgender Protection Rights Act. In September 2025, the High Court issued interim orders , through the Principal Registrar of Persons, to immediately amend the birth certificate of an intersex minor, assigned female at birth but now presenting as male, to allow them to sit for their national examination. In January 2026, the Court of Appeal revoked a ban instated in 2018 by the Kenya Film Classification Board on the lesbian-themed film Rafiki. Same-sex intimacy remains criminalized in Kenya under Sections 162 and 165 of the penal code . In 2019, the High Court of Kenya upheld the “unnatural offenses” laws, claiming that the law is not discriminatory and would, if abolished, open the door to same-sex marriage, which is unconstitutional in Kenya. The decision was appealed and is awaiting a hearing by the Court of Appeal. Kenya has also enacted new laws that would negatively impact the operations of LGBTIQ organizations. The registration process under the Public Benefits Organisation Act 2013 and the rules on the renewal of registration of organizations under Section 14 of the Community Groups Registration Act of 2022 put additional stringent measures that would expose LGBTIQ organizations. Section 19(2) of the Refugee Act of 2021 provides a “breach of public morality” as grounds for the expulsion of refugees or asylum seekers in Kenya. At the same time, Kenya is the first country in Africa to grant universal rights and recognition to intersex people. In July 2019, Kenya incorporated an intersex category into the national census , and in 2022, an amendment to the Children’s Act saw the inclusion of some explicit protections for intersex children, removing legal invisibility and providing tools for advocacy, documentation, and access to public services, even though implementation and detailed clinical protocols continue to evolve. The amendment did not, however, explicitly prohibit medically unnecessary surgeries on intersex minors. In 2023, the Intersex Persons Bill 2023 was drafted to ban these surgeries on intersex children and expand a wide variety of rights to intersex adults in a process led by the Kenya National Commission on Human Rights, but it has yet to be introduced in Parliament. In February 2025, Kenya officially acknowledged intersex individuals in its birth registration process when it revised the Births and Deaths Registration Act to include “intersex” as a category in official records. Conversion practices are still common. Hate speech from politicians and religious leaders is prevalent and legitimizes violence and discrimination against LGBTIQ people. Hate crimes can be perpetrated with impunity, as LGBTIQ people do not seek protection for fear of further victimization, outing, or abuse at the hands of law enforcement. In April 2023, Member of Parliament Peter Kaluma proposed a Family Protection Bill seeking to further criminalize consensual same-sex relations. The bill has not been tabled before Parliament. In May 2025, the second Pan-African Conference on Family Values , organized by the Africa Christian Professionals Forum, was held in Nairobi, focusing on defending “traditional” family structures against modern trends. The conference, which faced heavy pushback from NGOs, had representation from Kenyan government officials . View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International