Skip to main content
Skip to "About this site"
× Close: Top bar (escape key)
Information for Canadians on global security and travel related to the conflict in the Middle East
Language selection
Français
Government of Canada / Gouvernement du Canada
Search Travel.gc.ca
Search website
Search website
-->
Search website
-->
Search
Menu
Main Menu
Jobs and the workplace
Immigration and citizenship
Travel and tourism
Business and industry
Benefits
Health
Taxes
Environment and natural resources
National security and defence
Culture, history and sport
Policing, justice and emergencies
Transport and infrastructure
Canada and the world
Money and finances
Science and innovation
You are here:
Canada.ca
Travel
Destinations
Help us to improve our website. Take our survey !
-->
-->
Russia travel advice
Avoid all travel
Latest updates: Health – editorial change
Last updated: September 24, 2026 08:53 ET
On this page
Risk level
Safety and security
Entry and exit requirements
Health
Laws and culture
Natural disasters and climate
Need help?
Risk level
Disclaimer The features in this map do not constitute an authoritative source of geographical information. This map is solely intended to assist Canadians by illustrating the risk levels contained in the Travel Advice and Advisories for this destination. The features in this map do not necessarily represent the views of the Canadian government on international boundaries, nomenclature or political status. The text under the Risk levels section takes precedence over this map. Enlarge map   Russia travel advice Disclaimer The features in this map do not constitute an authoritative source of geographical information. This map is solely intended to assist Canadians by illustrating the risk levels contained in the Travel Advice and Advisories for this destination. The features in this map do not necessarily represent the views of the Canadian government on international boundaries, nomenclature or political status. The text under the Risk levels section takes precedence over this map.
RUSSIA - AVOID ALL TRAVEL Avoid all travel to Russia due to the impacts of the armed conflict with Ukraine and the risk of terrorism. The armed conflict in Ukraine has led to armed incursions and shelling in areas close to the Russian-Ukrainian border. Drone strikes, explosions, and fires have occurred further into Russia’s interior. The impacts of the armed conflict with Ukraine could also include: partial military mobilization restrictions on financial transactions limited flight options If you are in Russia, you should consider leaving the country by commercial means. If you remain in Russia, maintain a low profile.. Canadians holding Russian citizenship may be subject to call-up for mandatory military service. If you decide to remain despite this advisory, be aware that: you may have to stay in Russia longer than expected you will not be able to access your funds in Canadian or most international financial institutions you should not depend on the Government of Canada to help you leave the country Additionally, while you remain in Russia, you should: refrain from discussing political developments in public or online avoid areas where demonstrations and large gatherings are taking place make sure you have an adequate supply of cash, essential items and medications avoid any area where there are military installations or activity monitor trustworthy news sources to stay informed on the evolving situation register and update your contact information through the Registration of Canadians Abroad service and encourage other Canadian citizens in Russia to do so If you plan to leave Russia: communicate your travel plans to family and friends make sure your travel documents and those of your family are up-to-date review your plans and possible exit options on a regular basis confirm the status, hours, and accessibility of land and sea border crossings before you travel to the border
Back to top
Safety and security
Armed conflict with Ukraine There is frequent military activity within Russia’s borders. This includes: armed incursions shelling drone strikes explosions fires, arsons, and other acts of sabotage Attacks are most common in areas close to the Russian-Ukrainian border, notably in Bryansk, Kursk and Belgorod oblasts, and in the Black Sea region including Rostov Oblast and Krasnodar Krai. Similar attacks and incidents have also occurred at key infrastructure sites and military installations further into Russia's interior and in cities, including in Moscow and St. Petersburg. These attacks can lead to sudden and prolonged airspace closures. Military interceptions can also cause collateral damage. If you are in an area affected by drone or missile strikes: identify the location of the closest bomb shelter, if available if there are no bomb shelters nearby, shelter in a hardened structure away from windows when air raid warning sirens are active follow the advice of local authorities, including air-raid sirens and evacuation orders Financial transactions involving Canadian or international financial institutions are not possible. This includes withdrawals from ATMs and purchases with credit and bank cards. Availability of essential services may also be affected. Local authorities scrutinize communications. You may face heavy consequences if you discuss, share or publish information related to the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Foreign journalists and other media workers in Russia also face considerable risks. Security conditions are unpredictable and could deteriorate without notice. The ability of our Embassy to provide consular services in Russia may become severely limited. You may encounter an increased security presence with potential disruptions to transport and movement, especially in areas near Russian military installations. GPS and many navigation systems may not work in Russia. Areas bordering Ukraine The Russian government has declared martial law and maintains a significant military presence in areas bordering Ukraine. This includes the following oblasts: Rostov Bryansk Kursk Belgorod Voronezh Krasnodar The situation along the Ukrainian border is unpredictable and could change quickly. Exercise extreme vigilance if you must travel to this region.  Armed clashes, drone and missile strikes and military activity pose serious threats to your safety. If you are currently in this area, you should strongly consider leaving. The ability of the Embassy of Canada in Moscow to provide consular assistance in  areas bordering Ukraine is extremely limited. Terrorism There is a threat of terrorism. Terrorist groups have called for attacks on Russian soil. Incidents resulting in death and injury have occurred most frequently in the North Caucasus region, Moscow and St. Petersburg, but may happen throughout the country. Terrorist attacks could occur at any time.   Targets could include: government buildings, including schools cultural venues, including concert halls, nightclubs, and event centres places of worship Russian airlines, airports and other transportation hubs and networks public areas such as tourist attractions, restaurants, bars, coffee shops, shopping centres, markets, hotels and other sites frequented by foreigners Always be aware of your surroundings when in public places. Russian authorities have increased general security measures in Moscow and other large cities. Counter-terrorism operations, curfews, and other restrictions could lead to disruptions with little or no notice. North Caucasus Region The security situation in many areas of the North Caucasus Region is unstable and unpredictable. Republics of Chechnya, Dagestan and Ingushetia, and Stavropol Krai Terrorist attacks are frequent in the republics of Chechnya, Dagestan and Ingushetia and in the Stavropol region.  Suicide bombings occur on a regular basis and targeted assassinations have also taken place. Unexploded mines and munitions are widespread. Kidnapping for ransom is also common. You must obtain special permission from the Ministry of the Interior to enter certain areas and regions. Republics of Kabardino-Balkaria (including the Mount Elbrus region), Karachai-Cherkessia and North Ossetia Tensions are high in Russia’s border regions with Georgia and may affect the security situation in republics of Kabardino-Balkaria, Karachai-Cherkessia and North Ossetia. Military operations are carried out with little or no notice and are accompanied by travel restrictions. Border crossings with Azerbaijan and Georgia are subject to frequent and sometimes lengthy closures. Crime Violent crime Violent crime occurs frequently, sometimes targeting foreigners of non-European descent. Incidences include: armed robberies assault murder During your stay: be aware of your surroundings at all times avoid going out after dark avoid isolated areas don't resist an attack Petty crime Petty crime, such as pickpocketing and bag snatching, occurs frequently, especially in cities. Criminals, including groups of children and teenagers, use various techniques to distract the victims, including requests for help. In such situations, walk away quickly. Preferred areas for criminals include: underground walkways buses and trains, bus and train stations and airports popular tourist areas restaurants and public markets hotel rooms and residences, even when occupied and locked During your trip: keep your personal belongings, including your passport and your other travel documents in a secure place don’t show signs of affluence or wear expensive jewellery be aware of your surroundings, especially in busy tourist areas Replacing travel documents and visas is difficult and could considerably delay your return to Canada. Organized crime Organized criminal groups are active throughout Russia, particularly in large cities. Extortion and corruption are common business practices, including among foreign businesses. Criminals demand protection money from their victims under threat of serious violence. You should report extortion attempts to Russian authorities. Demonstrations Demonstrations occur occasionally. Even peaceful demonstrations can turn violent at any time. They can also lead to disruptions to traffic and public transportation. Unauthorized demonstrations have occurred across the country since the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Many demonstrators have been arrested. If you are close to a demonstration, you may be detained by the Russian authorities for questioning. Avoid areas where demonstrations and large gatherings are taking place Follow the instructions of local authorities Monitor local media for the latest information Useful links More about mass gatherings (large-scale events) Laws regarding minors involved in demonstrations Spiked food and drinks There are reports of criminals adding drugs into items that could put you at risk of sexual assault or robbery. Items include: food and drink gum cigarettes hand sanitizer cosmetics Incidents are most likely to occur: in nightclubs in bars and restaurants on public transportation, including taxis on the street While you’re in Russia:  be wary of accepting these items from new acquaintances never leave food or drinks unattended or in the care of strangers order drinks that come in sealed bottles or cans Women’s safety Women travelling alone may be subject to some forms of harassment or verbal abuse. Sexual assaults occur, including against foreign women. Always remain vigilant Do not accept offers of transportation from strangers Avoid dark alleys and isolated areas Keep your hotel doors and windows locked Advice for women travellers Fraud Foreigners have been scammed in the past when exchanging money on the street. Traffic police may stop motorists to collect fraudulent cash fines on the spot. Be cautious when using debit or credit cards: only exchange money at major banks pay careful attention when your cards are being handled by others use ATMs located in well-lit public areas or inside a bank or business avoid using card readers with an irregular or unusual feature cover the keypad with one hand when entering your PIN check for any unauthorized transactions on your account statements Cybercrime Cybercrime, malware attacks and online extortion are commonplace.  Criminals can compromise public Wi-Fi networks to steal personal data or credit information.  Be cautious when posting information or photos on social media  Use your own USB adaptor or carry an extra battery pack   Use secure public Wi-Fi networks  Do not discuss travel plans or any other personal information within earshot of strangers  Fraudulent police officers  Criminals may also pose as police officers, particularly in St. Petersburg. Real police officers wear a visible personal identification number on their uniforms. Fake checkpoints may be set up in rural areas to commit robbery. If you face a similar situation: offer to go to the nearest police station ask to see police credentials remain vigilant don’t hand over your money or documents unless you feel threatened request to provide your documents or money at the nearest police station, your hotel or another public place Useful links Cyber security while travelling   Overseas fraud Surveillance Local authorities in Russia block access to several: websites social networks search engines online services Don’t assume that your internet connection or past internet activity is private. Certain Canadian institutions and organizations are treated as “undesirable” by the Russian government. Local authorities may place you under surveillance if they believe you are working with civil society groups that: oppose the Russian invasion of Ukraine are critical of the Russian state advocate for 2SLGBTQI+ persons. You could also experience surveillance by the authorities simply because you are a foreigner. They may: monitor your telecommunications and your location at all times review the content stored on your electronic devices search your personal possessions or accommodations without your knowledge or consent subject you to intense scrutiny at the airport or border crossings, including searches of your personal possessions and telecommunications devices. 2SLGBTQI+ persons 2SLGBTQI+ persons, as well as their allies and families, have been attacked, harassed, and verbally and physically abused. Discrimination and violence targeting 2SLGBTQI+ persons occur, particularly in the North Caucasus republics of Chechnya and Dagestan. Although the laws of Russia do not prohibit homosexual activity, Russian federal law prohibits public actions that are described as promoting homosexuality and “non-traditional sexual relations.” Since January 2024, Russian law treats organizations advocating for 2SLGBTQI+ persons or issues as “extremist.” Previous laws banning “LGBT propaganda” and “the international LGBT movement” reflect an increasingly restrictive environment for 2SLGBTQI+ persons and their allies. Actions that contravene or appear to contravene this law may lead to arrest, a fine, jail time and deportation. Examples of such actions include: the dissemination of information, for example, through public statements public displays of affection. displaying symbols associated with 2SLGBTQI+ identities, cultures, or organizations, including flags showing or sharing media, including books and advertising, related to 2SLGBTQI+ themes or information Same sex marriage is not recognized in Russia. Homosexuality isn’t socially accepted. 2SLGBTQI+ travellers should carefully consider the risks of travelling to Russia. Travel and your sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression and sex characteristics Telecommunications Telecommunications If you travel to Russia with a foreign SIM card, you will not be able to access mobile internet, SMS or other services for at least 24 hours after your arrival. You could be without access to telecommunications for the duration of your stay. Buying a local-network SIM card in Russia is difficult for visitors and could take several days to complete. Upon your arrival in Russia, you can buy a SIM card at any local telecommunications stores. You will need to: bring your original passport along with a translated and notarized version visit a bank or a Multifunctional Center (MFC) to apply for a Russian Insurance Number of an Individual (Personal Account) (SNILS) create a profile on the Russian State Services website (Gosuslugi) submit your biometric data to a local financial centre, usually a bank Contact your mobile communications provider in Russia for more information. Local authorities maintain control over telecommunications networks and may restrict or suspend access to mobile and internet services at any time and without notice. Roads Road safety vary considerably across the country.   Drivers frequently disregard traffic laws and often drive and park in pedestrian areas. Accidents are common. Pedestrians should be particularly careful. In the event of an accident, don’t move the vehicle until the police arrive, even if the car is obstructing traffic. GPS and other navigation systems, including most maps applications, will not work in Russia. If you plan to travel on the roads, ensure that you have an up-to-date map and plan your trip in advance. Road conditions Road conditions vary and are often poor outside major cities. Many roads in rural areas are not paved. Don’t drive after dark. In winter, road travel can be hazardous due to ice and snow. Public transportation Most major cities have reliable public transportation including buses, subways or streetcars. Train When travelling by train, store valuables in a safe place and don’t leave the compartment unattended. Lock the door from the inside. Taxis There are reports of assault and robbery in unregistered taxis. Only use officially marked taxis Book taxis in advance from reputable companies either by phone or through taxi company apps Confirm the fare in advance Never share a taxi with strangers Marine transportation Boat accidents are common due to the overloading and poor maintenance of some vessels. Safety standards differ from those in Canada. Exercise caution and common sense when using marine transportation Don’t board vessels that appear overloaded or unseaworthy Power outages Power outages and shortages occur frequently throughout Russia. Not all buildings are equipped with generators. Keep a supply of water, food, fuel and an emergency kit on hand. Air travel We don't make assessments on the compliance of foreign domestic airlines with international safety standards. Information about foreign domestic airlines
Back to top
Entry and exit requirements
Some countries have imposed measures in response to the Ebola disease outbreak . These can include restrictions on entry and health screening measures for travellers having recently visited an affected country. If you are suspected of having symptoms, you may be subject to isolation, quarantine and/or travel restrictions. Contact the authorities of the country you are travelling to for more details. The authorities of a country or territory decide who can enter or exit through its borders. The Government of Canada cannot intervene on your behalf if you do not meet your destination’s entry or exit requirements. We have obtained the information on this page from local authorities. It can, however, change at any time. Verify this information with the  Foreign Representatives in Canada . Land border crossings Finnish authorities have closed border crossings along the land border with Russia. Since April 15, 2024, land and maritime border crossings are closed to vehicles and personal watercraft. Vehicles registered in Russia can no longer enter Finland, even if entering from a third country. Polish authorities have closed certain border crossings with Russia (Kaliningrad). If you intend to travel from Russia to Poland, you must apply for a humanitarian permit. If you plan to cross from Poland to Russia, only the following border crossings remain open for cars and buses: Grzechotki/Mamonovo Bezledy/Bagrationovsk Starting February 24, 2026, Estonian authorities will close the Luhamaa-Shumilkino and Koidula-Kunichina border crossings to all overnight traffic. The Narva-Ivangorod border crossing will remain open at all times. Only local residents are allowed to travel by land from Russia to Belarus. This restriction applies to cars, tour buses and trains. If you intend to travel between Belarus and Russia, you must have visas for both countries and travel by air. Useful links Contact information and hours of operation  – Finnish Border Guard Entry to Poland through external borders – Polish Border Guard Border crossing information – State Border Committee of the Republic of Belarus Border crossing information – Estonian Police and Border Guard Board Passport Entry requirements vary depending on the type of passport you're travelling with. Before you travel, check with your transportation company about passport requirements. Its rules on passport validity may be more stringent than the country's entry rules. Regular Canadian passport Your passport must be valid for at least 6 months beyond the date you expect to leave Russia. Passport for official travel Different entry rules may apply. Official travel Passport with “X” gender identifier While the Government of Canada issues passports with an “X” gender identifier, it cannot guarantee your entry or transit through other countries. You might face entry restrictions in countries that do not recognize the “X” gender identifier. Before you leave, verify this information with the closest foreign representative for your destination. You should also be aware that current systems used by some countries and travel companies may not recognize the “X” gender identifier. You may still be asked to provide your sex/gender information as either male or female when travelling. Other travel documents Different entry rules may apply when travelling with a temporary passport or an emergency travel document. Before you leave, verify this information with the closest foreign representative for your destination. Useful links Travel and your sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression and sex characteristics Foreign Representatives in Canada Canadian passports and other travel documents Visas Tourist visa: required for stays in commercial accommodations (exceptions apply) Guest visa: required for stays in private accommodations Business visa: required Student visa: required Transit visa: required (exceptions apply) Exit visa: required You must submit your visa request online to the Embassy of the Russian Federation in Canada. You must leave Russia once your visa expires. You can extend your visa by applying to the territorial units of the migration service before your active visa expires Tourist visa You need a tourist visa if you are staying at a hotel or other rented accommodations. Ensure that the hotel registers your visa when you check in. You should book your travel through a travel agency, which will submit a tourist visa application on your behalf. Certain Canadian travel agencies work with Russian travel agencies or companies that act as sponsors for tourist visas. In cases of expired tourist visas or lost or stolen Canadian passports, only the visa-sponsoring travel agency is authorized to apply for a new tourist visa on your behalf. Extensions are not issued. Holders of expired visas face heavy fines or detention upon departure. Private visas You need a private visa if you intend to stay in private accommodations. Business visa To get a business visa, you need to be sponsored by a Russian individual or organization (your host). Exit visa You must have a valid visa to be allowed to leave Russia. To avoid problems, including deportation, make sure your visa is valid beyond your intended departure date. For more information, confirm with the Embassy of Russia in Canada. Visa exceptions Contact your cruise company to find out if you need to apply for a Russian visa before your cruise starts. Some Russian international airports have transit areas that allow for visa-free travel through Russia. If you plan to transit through Russia, check with your transportation carrier to see if transit visa exceptions apply to you. Useful links Embassy of the Russian Federation Foreign diplomatic missions and consulates in Canada Migration card You should receive a migration card upon your arrival in Russia. These cards are usually distributed on flights and trains entering Russia or at points of entry, but sometimes they are not available, even at major international airports. Even if that’s the case, you are responsible to find a migration card and fill out a migration card. You must keep and carry the stamped part of the migration card throughout your stay. The card is required for hotel registration. If the police request to see your migration card, you must comply. You must present it, your passport and your registered visa. You must also present the card to border officials upon departure. If you hold a multiple-entry visa, you must fill out a new migration card every time you enter Russia. Failure to present this card upon departure may result in fines, serious delays or imprisonment. Registration All foreign visitors staying for more than 7 days in Russia must register their arrival within 72 hours of entering the country (excluding weekends and national holidays). If you are staying at a hotel for your entire trip, the hotel will take care of registering your stay with the authorities. You should confirm with hotel staff that they registered your stay as soon as you arrive. Visitors staying in private accommodations must register with the territorial office of the Federal Migration Service. Any Russian citizen with a resident registration (“propiska”) can register a foreigner staying at their home at a local police station or any post office. A small registration fee may apply. The visitor’s Russian host must be present during the process. Violation of the rules of migration registration may result in a fine. In some cases, visitors may face expulsion from Russia and a ban from re-entering of up to 5 years.  Customs declaration form Upon arrival in Russia, you must fill out a customs declaration form, then go through the red customs line and have the form stamped by a customs official. Without the stamp, any undeclared currency and valuables, including items that could be considered antique, may be confiscated upon departure. You must declare amounts of currency exceeding US$10,000 at border crossings. You may also be required to provide information on the origin of the money and its intended use. Any amount not declared on the form will be confiscated if you have not obtained an official bank receipt authorizing the clearance of these sums. You must keep your declaration form until you leave the country. You must fill out a second customs declaration form when you leave the country and present the two forms to a customs official. You must declare any amount greater than RUB 3,000. If you fail to declare in writing the amount of currency in your possession, the undeclared currency and valuables may be confiscated and you may be detained and charged with criminal offence, which may result in imprisonment. Special permits and restricted areas Travel to and residency in several Russian cities and regions is restricted. You must obtain permission from local authorities prior to entering a restricted city or region. Failure to do so may result in arrest, fines and/or deportation. Attach an itinerary to your visa application to avoid delays. Some areas must be specifically indicated in the visa, and you may have to pay an extra fee to include them. Passport requirements for individuals holding both Canadian and Russian citizenships If you have dual citizenship, you must enter and leave Russia on a Russian passport. If your Russian passport expires before you travel to Russia, Russian authorities in Canada can extend it for entry into Russia only. If the passport expires during your stay in Russia, you must obtain a new one before you leave. Renewing a Russian passport may take several months. If you enter Russia with a repatriation certificate issued by Russian authorities abroad, you may not be allowed to leave on a Canadian passport. This certificate is only valid for one-way travel into Russia. Entry ban on vehicles with Russian license plates In September 2023, Latvia, Estonia, Lithuania and Finland announced a ban on vehicles with Russian license plates entering their respective territories. The ban is enforced at the border as a result of existing European Union sanctions on the Russian Federation. Lithuania allows an exception for travellers able to prove transiting Lithuania to and from the Russian exclave of Kaliningrad. Other countries from the EU or the Schengen area have introduced similar bans. You should confirm with local authorities before travelling to the EU or Schengen area.   Health entry requirements If you are planning to remain in Russia for more than 3 months, you must provide a medical certificate of a negative test for HIV infection. The certificate must be valid for 3 months from the date of testing and include: passport details (full name, date of birth, passport number and country of residence) HIV test information (date of test, test results and signatures of the doctor who performed the test and the person examined) the length of your intended stay in Russia Other tests (such as for tuberculosis and leprosy) may be required for individuals staying in Russia for more than 3 months. Children and travel Learn about travelling with children . Yellow fever Learn about potential entry requirements related to yellow fever (vaccines section).
Back to top
Health
Relevant Travel Health Notices Measles: Advice for travellers This section has information and advice about health risks you might face when travelling. Following this advice can help reduce your risk of getting sick. Not all risks are listed here. It's best to talk to a healthcare provider or visit a travel health clinic preferably 6 weeks before your trip to get personalized health advice. Even if your travel date is coming up soon, it's still worthwhile to make an appointment. Routine vaccines
Make sure your routine vaccinations are up-to-date before you travel, no matter where you’re going.
These may include vaccines for measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR), diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis (whooping cough), polio, varicella (chickenpox), meningococcal disease, seasonal flu, and others.
Provincial and Territorial Immunization Information
Pre-travel vaccines and medications
When travelling in this destination, you might be at risk for diseases that can be prevented with vaccines or medications. Talk to a travel health care provider about which ones are right for you based on your travel plans.
The highlights below will also tell you if your destination may require that vaccine for entering or exiting. Yellow Fever - Country Entry Requirements Yellow fever is a disease caused by a flavivirus from the bite of an infected mosquito.
Travellers get vaccinated either because it is required to enter a country or because it is recommended for their protection.
Risk
There is no risk of yellow fever in this country.
Country Entry Requirement*
Proof of vaccination is not required to enter this country.
Recommendation
Vaccination is not recommended.
* It is important to note that country entry requirements may not reflect your risk of yellow fever at your destination. It is recommended that you contact the nearest diplomatic or consular office of the destination(s) you will be visiting to verify any additional entry requirements.
About Yellow Fever
Yellow Fever Vaccination Centres in Canada Hepatitis A There is a risk of hepatitis A in this destination. It is a disease of the liver. People can get hepatitis A if they ingest contaminated food or water, eat foods prepared by an infectious person, or if they have close physical contact (such as oral-anal sex) with an infectious person, although casual contact among people does not spread the virus.
Practise  safe food and water precautions and wash your hands often. Vaccination is recommended for all travellers to areas where hepatitis A is present. Tick-borne encephalitis Tick-borne encephalitis (TBE) is a risk in some areas of this destination. It is a viral disease that affects the central nervous system (brain and spinal cord). It is spread to humans by the bite of infected ticks or occasionally when unpasteurized milk products are consumed.
Travellers to areas where TBE is found may be at higher risk  during April to November, and the risk is highest for people who hike or camp in forested areas.
Protect yourself from tick bites . The vaccine is not available in Canada. It may be available in the destination you are travelling to. Rabies
Rabies is present in this destination and is carried by dogs and some wildlife, including bats. Rabies is a serious disease that’s almost always fatal once symptoms appear. It's spread to humans through the saliva of infected animals, mainly through bites, but it can also be spread through scratches.
Before you travel, talk to a health care professional about rabies vaccination. Vaccination may be recommended for people at higher risk of exposure, such as:
veterinarians and wildlife workers
children
adventure travellers and cave explorers (spelunkers)
people who will be in close contact with animals
While travelling:
avoid contact with animals, including free roaming dogs
supervise children closely around animals
If you’re bitten or scratched by an animal:
wash the wound right away with soap and clean water for about 15 minutes
get medical care as soon as possible
Treatment to prevent rabies is often available in this destination.
If you get treatment to prevent rabies while outside Canada, ask for:
written records of medications and vaccines administered, including when they were given, product names, and batch or lot numbers
photos of the packaging and labels of any medications or vaccines given to you
When you return to Canada, see a health care professional as soon as possible and bring your treatment records to your appointment.
Learn more:  Rabies: Symptoms and treatment Measles Measles is a serious viral infection that spreads easily. It spreads through the air, and can stay in the air for up to 2 hours. You can also get measles by direct contact with an infected person or by touching a surface with the virus on it and then touching your eyes, nose, or mouth before washing your hands.
Getting vaccinated is the best way to protect yourself and others from measles. In Canada, the measles vaccine is part of the routine immunization schedule. If you’re unsure whether you’re protected, talk to a healthcare provider.
Learn more:
Measles Japanese encephalitis Japanese encephalitis is a viral infection that can cause swelling of the brain.  It is spread to humans through the bite of an infected mosquito. Risk is very low for most travellers. Travellers at relatively higher risk may want to consider vaccination for JE prior to travelling.
Travellers are at higher risk if they will be:
travelling long term (e.g. more than 30 days)
making multiple trips to endemic areas
staying for extended periods in rural areas
visiting an area suffering a JE outbreak
engaging in activities involving high contact with mosquitos (e.g., entomologists)
Hepatitis B   Hepatitis B is a risk in every destination. It is a viral liver disease that is easily transmitted from one person to another through exposure to blood and body fluids containing the hepatitis B virus.  Travellers who may be exposed to blood or other bodily fluids (e.g., through sexual contact, medical treatment, sharing needles, tattooing, acupuncture or occupational exposure) are at higher risk of getting hepatitis B.
Hepatitis B vaccination is recommended for all travellers. Prevent hepatitis B infection by practicing safe sex, only using new and sterile drug equipment, and only getting tattoos and piercings in settings that follow public health regulations and standards. COVID-19 COVID-19 is an infectious viral disease. Most of the time, it spreads when people are in close contact with others who are infected with the virus. It spreads through respiratory particles, or through an infected surface or object.
Vaccination is one of the most important ways to protect yourself from developing serious complications from COVID-19. Talk to a healthcare provider about the COVID-19 vaccine before travelling. Evidence shows that the COVID-19 vaccines used in Canada are very effective at preventing severe illness, hospitalization and death from COVID-19.
In addition to vaccination, use personal protective measures to help protect yourself and others.
Learn more :
Vaccine for COVID-19: How to get vaccinated COVID-19: Spread, prevention and risks Influenza  The best way to protect yourself from seasonal influenza (flu) is to get vaccinated every year. Get the flu shot at least 2 weeks before travelling.
The flu occurs worldwide.
In the Northern Hemisphere, the flu season usually runs from November to   April.
In the Southern Hemisphere, the flu season usually runs between April and   October.
In the tropics, there is flu activity year round.
The flu vaccine available in one hemisphere may only offer partial protection against the flu in the other hemisphere.
The flu virus spreads from person to person when they cough or sneeze or by touching objects and surfaces that have been contaminated with the virus. Clean your hands often and wear a mask if you have a fever or respiratory symptoms. Safe food and water precautions
Eating or drinking unsafe food or water, or swimming in contaminated water can make you sick while travelling. Take precautions by following these tips:
Boil it, cook it, peel it, or leave it (only eat food that is prepared safely)
Avoid, if possible, getting water in your eyes, mouth, or nose when swimming in freshwater (like streams, lakes, or canals), especially after heavy rain or flooding - the water might look clean but can still be contaminated
Don’t swallow water when bathing, showering, swimming in pools, or using hot tubs
Eat and drink safely outside Canada Tick and insect bite prevention
Many diseases are spread by bites from infected ticks and insects like mosquitoes, fleas, or flies. Before you travel, find out what types of ticks or insects are in the area, when they’re most active, and what diseases they can spread.
To protect yourself from bites:
use an approved bug spray (insect repellent) on exposed skin
wear light-coloured, loose clothing made of tightly woven materials like nylon or polyester
wear socks and closed-toe shoes
sleep under mosquito netting if you’re outdoors or staying in places that aren’t fully enclosed
do a full body tick check on yourself, your children, your gear, and any pets you’re travelling with when you return from outdoor activities
Insect bite and pest prevention Personal insect repellents Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever There is a risk of Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever (CCHF) in this destination. The risk is generally low for most travellers. CCHF is a disease caused by a virus that can spread to humans through the bite of an infected tick or through contact with the blood or tissues of an infected animal.
Symptoms usually appear suddenly and may include  fever, headache, muscle aches, dizziness, neck pain and stiffness, sore eyes and sensitivity to light, and bleeding under the skin.  In some cases, it can be fatal.
Celebrations which include the slaughtering of animals and contact with their blood or tissues may increase the risk of exposure to the virus. Protect yourself from tick bites and wear gloves or other protective clothing if you are in contact with the blood or tissues of animals, particularly livestock. There is no vaccine available for CCHF.
Learn more: Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever (WHO Fact Sheet) Insect bite and pest prevention Animal precautions
Some infections, such as rabies, spread through direct contact with animals. Others, such as hantavirus infections and avian influenza, can also spread indirectly when people come into contact with areas contaminated by animal droppings or other animal waste.
Certain activities can increase your chances of coming into contact with animals, their droppings, or their body fluids, like:
travelling in rural or forested areas
camping, hiking, or visiting caves
visiting places where live animals are sold or killed for food, like wet markets
To reduce your risk of getting sick:
avoid contact with animals like stray dogs, livestock (such as pigs and cows), monkeys, snakes, rodents, birds, and bats.
stay away from places where animal waste can build up, such as caves
avoid eating undercooked meat
Make sure to closely watch children; they are more likely to try to touch animals. Avian Influenza Human cases of avian influenza have been reported in this destination. Avian influenza   is a viral infection that can spread quickly and easily among birds and in rare cases it can infect mammals, including people. The risk is low for most travellers.
Avoid contact with birds, including wild, farm, and backyard birds (alive or dead) and surfaces that may have bird droppings on them. Ensure all poultry dishes, including eggs and wild game, are properly cooked.
Travellers with a higher risk of exposure include those:
visiting live bird/animal markets or poultry farms
working with poultry (such as chickens, turkeys, domestic ducks)
hunting, de-feathering, field dressing and butchering wild birds and wild mammals
working with wild birds for activities such as research, conservation, or rehabilitation
working with wild mammals, especially those that eat wild birds (e.g., foxes)
All eligible people are encouraged to get the seasonal influenza shot, which will protect them against human influenza viruses. While the seasonal influenza shot does not prevent infection with avian influenza, it can reduce the chance of getting sick with human and avian influenza viruses at the same time. Person-to-person infections
When travelling, you can reduce your risk of getting or spreading respiratory infections, like the flu or COVID-19, by:
staying at your accommodation and limiting contact with others if you’re sick
wearing a well-fitting mask, especially:
if you’re sick and need to be around others
when you’re at large indoor events or in crowded settings, like sporting events, concerts, and airports
cleaning your hands regularly with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, or using hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol
covering your coughs and sneezes with a tissue or your elbow, not your hands
Mass gatherings (large-scale events) Clean your hands to help reduce the spread of infectious diseases Respiratory infectious diseases: Reduce your risk
To lower your risk of getting sexually transmissible infections (STIs), HIV, and mpox, you can:
get vaccinated against mpox if you’re eligible
practise safer sex methods
use barrier protection during sexual activity, like condoms and dental dams.
Mpox vaccines Sexual health and travel HIV and AIDS: Travel health advice Tuberculosis Tuberculosis is an infection caused by bacteria and usually affects the lungs.
For most travellers the risk of tuberculosis is low.
Travellers who may be at high risk while travelling in regions with risk of tuberculosis should discuss pre- and post-travel options with a health care professional.
High-risk travellers include those visiting or working in prisons, refugee camps, homeless shelters, or hospitals, or travellers visiting friends and relatives. Medical services and facilities Good health care is only available in major cities and the quality of care varies greatly throughout the country. Adequate facilities exist in larger cities and usually require cash payment upon admission. Medical evacuation, which can be very expensive, may be necessary in the event of serious illness or injury. Make sure you get travel insurance that includes coverage for medical evacuation and hospital stays. Health and safety outside Canada Medication Some prescription medications may not be available in Russia. Russia has very strict rules on the importation of medication. Certain prescription and over-the-counter drugs that are common in Canada may be prohibited. If you are travelling with medication, even over-the-counter medication, you must have a doctor’s note translated to Russian confirming that you need the medication. Contact an embassy or a consulate of the Russian Federation for up-to-date information. If you take prescription medication, you’re responsible for determining their legality in Russia. Bring sufficient quantities of your medication with you Always keep your medication in the original container Pack them in your carry-on luggage Carry a copy of your prescriptions Keep in Mind...
The decision to travel is the sole responsibility of the traveller. The traveller is also responsible for his or her own personal safety.
Be prepared. Do not expect medical services to be the same as in Canada. Pack a   travel health kit , especially if you will be travelling away from major city centres.
Back to top
Laws and culture
You must abide by local laws. Learn about what you should do and how we can help if you are arrested or detained abroad . “Undesirable” Organizations Certain Canadian institutions, including NGOs, community organizations and educational institutions are considered “undesirable” by the Russian authorities. If you have a current or previous affiliation with these groups, you may be denied entry to Russia or face increased scrutiny at the border or in the country. You may face deportation if you are already in Russia. Identification Authorities frequently perform random identity checks in public places. You must carry the following identification documents at all times: a valid passport with two blank pages for stamps a valid Russian visa your migration card your stamped registration notification You may be fined or detained if you cannot provide proper documentation to Russian authorities. Only the special police of the Federal Migration Bureau have the authority to arrest, detain and impose fines on improperly documented foreigners. If you are stopped in the street and requested to pay a fine, ask to see the officer’s name and identification, and to contact the Embassy of Canada to Russia in Moscow. Drugs Penalties for possession, use or trafficking of illegal drugs are severe. Convicted offenders can expect jail sentences and heavy fines. Drugs, alcohol and travel Minors participating in demonstrations It is illegal for minors (those under 18) to participate in unauthorized protests. Adults who involve minors in such protests could face up to 15 days in jail and fines of up to RUB1 million. 2SLGBTQI+ persons Although the laws of Russia do not prohibit homosexual activity, Russian federal law prohibits public actions that are described as promoting homosexuality and “non-traditional sexual relations.” Since January 2024, Russian law treats organizations advocating for 2SLGBTQI+ persons or issues as “extremist.” Previous laws banning “LGBT propaganda” and “the international LGBT movement” reflect an increasingly restrictive environment for 2SLGBTQI+ persons and their allies. Actions that contravene or appear to contravene this law may lead to arrest, a fine, jail time and deportation. Examples of such actions include: the dissemination of information, for example, through public statements public displays of affection. displaying symbols associated with 2SLGBTQI+ identities, cultures, or organizations, including flags showing or sharing media, including books and advertising, related to 2SLGBTQI+ themes or information Same sex marriage is not recognized in Russia. Homosexuality isn’t socially accepted. Travel and your sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression and sex characteristics Dual citizenship Dual citizenship is not legally recognized in Russia. If local authorities consider you a citizen of Russia, they may refuse to grant you access to Canadian consular services. This will prevent us from providing you with those services. If you are also a Russian citizen and reside in Russia or hold permanent residency status in another country, you must declare this citizenship or residency status to your local migration office. You may also be subject to certain legal obligations, including military service. You may be detained, imprisoned, or fined large sums if you try to avoid military service. Seek advice from the nearest Russian embassy or consulate before travelling to Russia or consult official sources from the Government of the Russian Federation. Useful links Official information  - Government of the Russian Federation (may not be currently available depending on your location) Military mobilization  - Government of the Russian Federation (may not be currently available depending on your location) Requirement and consequences of non-compliance with the declaration of foreign citizenship  - Federal Migration Service of the Russian Federation (in Russian, may not be currently available depending on your location) General information for travellers with dual citizenship International Child Abduction The Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction is an international treaty. It can help parents with the return of children who have been removed to or retained in certain countries in violation of custody rights. It does not apply between Canada and Russia. If your child was wrongfully taken to, or is being held in Russia by an abducting parent: act as quickly as you can consult a lawyer in Canada and in Russia to explore all the legal options for the return of your child report the situation to the nearest Canadian government office abroad or to Global Affairs Canada by calling the Emergency Watch and Response Centre If your child was removed from a country other than Canada, consult a lawyer to determine if The Hague Convention applies. Be aware that Canadian consular officials cannot interfere in private legal matters or in another country's judicial affairs. Useful links International Child Abductions: A guide for affected parents Children and travel Canadian embassies and consulates by destination Request emergency assistance Religious activity Religious activity is heavily regulated in Russia. If you plan to engage in religious activity, such as missionary work, make sure you do not break local laws. Driving You should carry an international driving permit. You may drive with a Canadian driver’s licence if you carry a notarized Russian translation. You must obtain a local permit if you stay longer than 6 months. The legal blood alcohol content limit is significantly lower than in Canada. Those found guilty of drinking and driving can expect heavy fines, suspension of their driving permit and immediate detention. Repeat offenders may face prison sentences. The traffic police can impose fines on drivers for traffic violations. They can conduct identity checks on pedestrians, but they are not authorized to impose fines. The same is true of police in the underground metro systems. International Driving Permit Imports and exports The importation and use of electronic equipment are strictly controlled. Foreigners have faced charges of espionage for possessing improperly certified GPS devices, such as those used for geological mapping. You must obtain a certificate from the Ministry of Culture to export items that appear old (prior to 1945) or may have cultural value. Customs officials may conduct thorough baggage searches and can arrest you if you don’t have the necessary certificate. Contact the nearest Russian embassy or consulate or consult the Federal Customs Service prior to departure for up-to-date information on customs requirements. Foreign diplomatic missions and consulates in Canada Money The currency of Russia is the Russian ruble (RUB). Following the Russian invasion of Ukraine, major Western-issued credit card corporations no longer operate in Russia. Credit and debit cards from outside of Russia will not work at banks, businesses, or ATMs within Russia. ATMs are common in major cities and will accept cards issued in Russia. It is illegal to pay for goods and services in foreign currency. You can exchange U.S. dollars at any exchange bureau. Carry new, crisp bills as worn or used U.S. banknotes may not be accepted. In major cities, you can usually exchange Euros and U.S. dollars at various banks.
Back to top
Natural disasters and climate
Climate change Climate change is affecting Russia. Extreme and unusual weather events are becoming more frequent and may affect your travel plans. Monitor local news to stay informed on the current situation. Forest fires Forest fires are common between July and September, particularly in Siberia. The air quality in areas near active fires may deteriorate due to heavy smoke. In case of a major fire: stay away from the affected area, particularly if you suffer from respiratory ailments follow the instructions of local emergency services monitor local media for up-to-date information on the situation Seismic activity Earthquakes Parts of Russia are in active seismic zones. Earthquakes commonly occurs in: Caucasus Chechnya Kamchatka Peninsula the Kuril Islands the Sakhalin Island the Baikal Rift Zone in Siberia Even minor earthquakes can cause significant damage.  Landslides can occur with little warning following volcanic eruptions and earthquakes. Roads may become impassable. Earthquake Early Alert Service – Russian Academy of Science Volcanoes There are several active volcanoes on the Kamchatka Peninsula and the Kuril Islands. Eruptions may occur at any time. Series of tremors can lead to evacuations of surrounding areas. Falling ash may disrupt air traffic.  Flooding and landslides Heavy rains, particularly during spring and summer, can cause flooding and landslides. Roads may become impassable and infrastructure damaged. Exercise caution, particularly in areas around rivers Stay informed of the latest regional weather forecasts Follow the advice of local authorities, including evacuation orders
Back to top
Need help?
Local services Emergency services In case of emergency, dial 112 or: police: 102 medical assistance: 103 firefighters: 101 Consular assistance During business hours: contact the office nearest to you. For emergency assistance at any time: contact the Emergency Watch and Response Centre in Ottawa. You can also call toll-free at 810-800-201-41012. Moscow - Embassy of Canada Street Address Smolenskaya Naberezhnaya 10, Moscow 121099, Russian Federation Telephone +7 (+8 within Russia / en Russie) (495) 925-6000 Fax +7 (495) 925-6004 Email moscoconsular@international.gc.ca Internet https://www.international.gc.ca/country-pays/russia-russie/index.aspx?lang=eng X (Twitter) @CanadaRussia Other social media Канада в России Consular district Russian Federation Vladivostok - Honorary consul of Canada Street Address 707-59 Krasnogo Znameni prospekt, Vladivostok 690002, Russia Telephone +7 (902) 555-60-30 Fax +7 (423) 242-0024 Email vladivostok@international.gc.ca Internet https://www.international.gc.ca/country-pays/russia-russie/vladivostok.aspx?lang=eng X (Twitter) @CanadaRussia Consular district Primorsky Krai, Khabarovsk Krai, Sakhalin Oblast, Amur Oblast, Magadan Oblast, Kamchatka Oblast, Jewish Autonomous Oblast
Useful links
Register as a Canadian abroad
Download the Travel Smart app -->
View travel insurance information
Read our Traveller’s Checklist
Advice for different types of travellers
What to do if things go wrong
Travel Advice and Advisories archives -->
Disclaimer
The decision to travel is your choice and you are responsible for your personal safety abroad. We take the safety and security of Canadians abroad very seriously and provide credible and timely information in our Travel Advice to enable you to make well-informed decisions regarding your travel abroad.
The content on this page is provided for information only. While we make every effort to give you correct information, it is provided on an "as is" basis without warranty of any kind, expressed or implied. The Government of Canada does not assume responsibility and will not be liable for any damages in connection to the information provided.
If you need consular assistance while abroad, we will make every effort to help you. However, there may be constraints that will limit the ability of the Government of Canada to provide services.
Learn more about consular services .
Risk Levels
Take normal security precautions
Take similar precautions to those you would take in Canada.
Exercise a high degree of caution
There are certain safety and security concerns or the situation could change quickly. Be very cautious at all times, monitor local media and follow the instructions of local authorities.
IMPORTANT: The two levels below are official Government of Canada Travel Advisories and are issued when the safety and security of Canadians travelling or living in the country or region may be at risk.
Avoid non-essential travel
Your safety and security could be at risk. You should think about your need to travel to this country, territory or region based on family or business requirements, knowledge of or familiarity with the region, and other factors. If you are already there, think about whether you really need to be there. If you do not need to be there, you should think about leaving.
Avoid all travel
You should not travel to this country, territory or region. Your personal safety and security are at great risk. If you are already there, you should think about leaving if it is safe to do so.
Date modified:
2026-09-24
About this site Global Affairs Canada Contacts -->
Travel and tourism
Embassies, consulates and offices
Contact Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada
Contact the Canada Border Services Agency
Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Manage life events About government Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy