Definitive Victory in Arian’s Case: Romanian Justice Confirms Transgender People’s Right to Align Their Identity Documents, Following CJEU Ruling – Accept Romania Sari la conținut svg]:h-full [&>svg]:w-auto"> We are Accept ACCEPT NGO Directors Executive members Partners Our Activity Initiatives Campaigns Community Events Strategic Litigation Bucharest Pride Care for Community Legal Counseling Psyhcological counseling LGBTQIA+ support group Trans support group Support group for parents AROACE support group Queer friendly doctors Involve Be a volunteer Donate Become a member Campaigns Be an ally Useful News FAQ Reports Resources Photo gallery Careers Donează We are Accept Our Activity Bucharest Pride Care for Community Involve Useful Donează Înapoi We are Accept ACCEPT NGO Directors Executive members Partners Înapoi Our Activity Initiatives Campaigns Community Events Strategic Litigation Înapoi Care for Community Legal Counseling Psyhcological counseling LGBTQIA+ support group Trans support group Support group for parents AROACE support group Queer friendly doctors Înapoi Involve Be a volunteer Donate Become a member Campaigns Be an ally Înapoi Useful News FAQ Reports Resources Photo gallery Careers Enter pentru a căuta Esc pentru a închide Definitive Victory in Arian’s Case: Romanian Justice Confirms Transgender People’s Right to Align Their Identity Documents, Following CJEU Ruling 31 March 2026 The Romanian state must issue Arian Mirzarafie-Ahi a new birth certificate that reflects the identity already recognized in Great Britain, prior to Brexit. The ruling in favor of the transgender man with dual citizenship, issued by the Sector 6 Court of Bucharest, became definitive after the Bucharest Tribunal rejected the appeals filed by the Cluj Directorate for Personal Records, the Civil Status Service, and the General Directorate for Personal Records. As early as 2024, the Court of Justice of the European Union (CJEU) established, in Arian’s case, the obligation of member states to transcribe the identity documents of transgender individuals who have undergone a legal gender recognition procedure within the European Union. Both before national courts and the European court, Arian was represented by lawyer Iustina Ionescu, with the support of ACCEPT. “Today, March 31st, we celebrate Transgender Day of Visibility, and I am happy to use this occasion to return to the people in my community with good news. We have definitively won in the Romanian courts! This is not just my victory, but ours – of those who are still waiting to be seen, heard, and recognized. I thank lawyer Iustina Ionescu and recommend to all those in my situation who have gone through the process of changing documents in another European country, to contact the ACCEPT Association to obtain the transcription of their documents in Romania,” stated Arian Mirzarafie-Ahi. “The process in which I accompanied Arian over the past years has, finally, reached an outcome that does him justice. More than a personal victory, the decision confirmed by the Bucharest Tribunal is a major step towards respecting the rights of all transgender people in Romania. Romanians who have obtained a definitive gender recognition decision in another member state will no longer have to go through the arduous procedure in Romania. We appeal to the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Justice to adopt a clear, fast, and accessible procedure for changing documents for all Romanian transgender citizens, regardless of whether they have lived in other EU member states, as the European Court of Human Rights has demanded since 2021, in the case of X and Y v. Romania,” emphasizes lawyer Iustina Ionescu. “Arian’s case is another living example that it can be done. That everything we do matters, that justice still exists, and that a better future for the LGBTI community in Romania is possible. It is an opportunity to remember that none of the rights we enjoy today appeared out of nowhere and that everything we have must be defended. We are grateful to Arian for the courage to make this entire process public and to confront state institutions in court, which, by contesting the judges’ decision, shamefully demonstrated that they do not work in the interest of citizens,” declares Victor Ciobotaru, executive director of the ACCEPT Association. The definitive ruling of the Bucharest Tribunal also implies the obligation of institutions to pay court costs. Furthermore, the Cluj Directorate for Personal Records, Civil Status Service, must execute the court’s decision and urgently issue Arian a new birth certificate. Should the competent authorities fail to implement the court ruling, we will request the court to apply daily penalties for non-compliance, so that the obligations established by the ruling do not remain merely formal, but produce concrete effects. We will use all necessary legal steps to ensure the effective execution of the ruling. Case Timeline Arian Mirzarafie-Ahi initiated legal action at the Sector 6 Court of Bucharest in 2021, after the Cluj Directorate for Personal Records, Civil Status Service, refused to transcribe the documents issued by the British state. Despite Arian having completed a complex legal gender recognition procedure, spanning approximately 4 years, the institutions in Romania demanded that he repeat the entire process in Romania, where there is no clear and dignified procedure that transgender people can access. The refusal of the Romanian authorities placed him in a situation where he had to live for a while with two sets of documents and two different identities. Moreover, after Brexit, every time he traveled to Romania to visit his family, Arian was forced either to use his outdated documents or to give up his rights as a European citizen, including the right to free movement. The use of Romanian documents, on several occasions, turned him into a victim of discrimination and caused him numerous damages over time. In the second half of 2022, the Sector 6 Court of Bucharest decided to send preliminary questions to the CJEU, considering that Romania’s refusal to equate the change in Arian’s legal civil status in the United Kingdom might violate EU norms. In 2024, the Court ruled that Romania must transcribe any changes to the name and gender in the identity documents of Romanian citizens that occurred in other EU member states, without requiring a new internal procedure for gender recognition. The case returned to the Romanian courts, which, in accordance with the CJEU ruling, sided with Arian. Contrary to their obligations to correctly represent citizens’ interests and to recognize the mandatory implementation of CJEU rulings, the Cluj Civil Status and the General Directorate for Personal Records appealed the court’s decision, refusing to apply European jurisprudence. In March of this year, the Bucharest Tribunal decided to reject the appeal, reaffirming the importance of respecting the rights of transgender people in Romania as European citizens. ← Articolul anterior Articolul următor → ACCEPT Asociația ACCEPT luptă de aproape trei decenii pentru o Românie în care nimeni nu e lăsat în afara legii, a societății sau a propriei familii. Navigare Who we are Community Care Projects Campaigns Events Cases Contact Contact Us Susține Susține lupta pentru drepturi egale. Fiecare donație contează. Donează © 2026 Asociația ACCEPT. Toate drepturile rezervate. EN RO Privacy Policy Administrează consimțământul Pentru a oferi cea mai bună experiență, folosim tehnologii, cum ar fi cookie-uri, pentru a stoca și/sau accesa informațiile despre dispozitive. Consimțământul pentru aceste tehnologii ne permite să procesăm date, cum ar fi comportamentul de navigare sau ID-uri unice pe acest site. Dacă nu îți dai consimțământul sau îți retragi consimțământul dat poate avea afecte negative asupra unor anumite funcționalități și funcții. Funcționale Funcționale Always active Stocarea tehnică sau accesul este strict necesară în scopul legitim de a permite utilizarea unui anumit serviciu cerut în mod explicit de către un abonat sau un utilizator sau în scopul exclusiv de a executa transmiterea unei comunicări printr-o rețea de comunicații electronice. Preferințe Preferințe Stocarea tehnică sau accesul este necesară în scop legitim pentru stocarea preferințelor care nu sunt cerute de abonat sau utilizator. Statistici Statistici Stocarea tehnică sau accesul care sunt utilizate exclusiv în scopuri statistice. Stocarea tehnică sau accesul care sunt utilizate exclusiv în scopuri statistice anonime. Fără o citație, conformitatea voluntară din partea Furnizorului tău de servicii de internet sau înregistrările suplimentare de la o terță parte, informațiile stocate sau preluate numai în acest scop nu pot fi utilizate de obicei pentru a te identifica. Marketing Marketing Stocarea tehnică sau accesul este necesară pentru a crea profiluri de utilizator la care trimitem publicitate sau pentru a urmări utilizatorul pe un site web sau pe mai multe site-uri web în scopuri de marketing similare. Manage options Manage services Manage {vendor_count} vendors Read more about these purposes Acceptă Refuză Vezi preferințele Salvează preferințele Vezi preferințele {title} {title} {title} Administrează consimțămintele English Română ( Romanian )