This man needs your help to take on his country's government and decriminalise homosexuality | PinkNews About Us Advertise Work with us Login Register Latest News View all UK US World Health Politics Sport Business Culture View all TV Film Celebrity Drag Theatre Music Gaming Lifestyle View all Beauty Careers Fashion Relationships Travel Shopping View all Deals Recommended Fashion & Beauty Tickets Video View all News & Politics Entertainment Lifestyle Discover Trans Awareness Week Drag Race Explainers The Queer Agenda Toggle menu Account Register Login Current Affairs This man needs your help to take on his country’s government and decriminalise homosexuality Nov 21 2017 Written by Jason Jones Share Save for later Comment PinkNews is supporting Jason’s campaign to decriminalise homosexuality, and we hope our readers can donate too. I am a criminal simply because I am a gay man. My name is Jason Jones. I am a human rights defender challenging my Government in our High Court to change this situation. In my home country of Trinidad and Tobago, I can be arrested and imprisoned for up to 25 years for having consensual sex with my adult male partner. Queer News. Straight Up. The LGBTQ+ stories you don’t want to miss, delivered to your inbox daily. Email address required Must be valid email Register By registering you agree to our Privacy Policy Thanks for registering! You can update your email subscriptions at any time in the My profile section of your account. Any sexual intimacy between adult couples of the same-sex is a crime (including sex between women). My government calls these acts “serious indecency”. They can imprison us for up to 25 years for penetrative sex and for five years for any other act of sexual intimacy. There are around 100,000 LGBT people on my islands, all living with the threat of criminal law hanging over them. We inherited these laws from Britain, but my own Government extended the law from only gay men to include lesbians as well after we gained our independence. I am asking the Court to declare that these laws are unconstitutional. Click here to donate and help Jason’s campaign. That they violate my human rights, and encourage homophobia and hatred from my fellow citizens against the LGBT community, and therefore they MUST be removed. But my Government is actively defending this case, saying that these laws must stay in place. Since filing my legal challenge in February of this year, I have received more than 60 death threats, and hundreds of messages of hate on my social media pages. I live in fear for my safety and have become completely isolated from friends and family because I don’t want anything to happen to them back home. My Court case will be heard on 30 January 2018 in the High Court, Port of Spain, Trinidad. Together, we can make 2018 the year that Trinidad and Tobago’s LGBT people are no longer criminals merely for being who we are and for who we love. Over the last two years, I have planned my case with a brilliant legal team made up of lawyers from both Trinidad and Britain. They have worked for free, giving me hundreds of thousands of pounds worth of free work. I am so very grateful to them all. My day in Court is nearly here. Now, I need your help. Click here to donate and help Jason’s campaign. So far, I have run this case on a shoe string, with some money donated by an HIV prevention charity. Why did they donate? Because it is a well-established fact that criminalisation creates hidden sexual contact that causes and boosts HIV transmission. And the intense stigma and fear associated with being LGBT prevents people from accessing diagnosis and seeking treatment! Hence, we are affected by these laws even when we are not arrested. The HIV rate among men who have sex with men in the English-speaking Caribbean is an enormous one-in-four. In the non-English-speaking Caribbean it is far less at one-in-fifteen. What causes this huge difference? The English-speaking Caribbean criminalises homosexuality. Other parts of the Caribbean do not. I still need to raise at least £15,000 for my Court case: for Court fees, transport and security for my lawyers, and the cost of printing documents for Court. Click here to donate and help Jason’s campaign. Litigation is not cheap, even when you have the best lawyers working for you for free! Dec 01 2023 16 TV stars you grew up watching who later came out as LGBTQ+ Your donation will help the 100,000 LGBT people have their day in Court, so that we can challenge these barbaric laws that criminalise us for being lesbian, gay, bisexual and trans. Australia just voted ‘yes’ to same-sex love. We are a long way from that, but you can help us make the first steps. More: Americas americas Carribean Gay Homosexuality Law LGBT Trinidad and Tobago Related articles Exclusive Jul 14 2025 Patsy Stevenson on re-allocating legal funds to trans cases: ‘Women’s and transgender rights are not mutually exclusive’ World Jul 09 2025 All 65 countries where it’s illegal to be LGBTQ+ in 2025, including the UAE and Mali News Apr 04 2025 Trinidad and Tobago ‘put a target on LGBTQIA+ people’ after recriminalising homosexuality Current Affairs Nov 14 2018 Court strikes down Guyana anti-transgender law Current Affairs Nov 12 2018 Conservative lawyer compares Pride flag to Nazi swastika Latest News Previous Next Celebrity Sep 25 Trans influencer calls out Nikki Glaser for stand-up joke about what’s ‘in her pants’ Culture Sep 25 Trans pro wrestling trailblazer Gisele Shaw signs exclusive NWA contract Bisexual Sep 25 The Traitors star Freddie Fraser’s mum’s emotional response to his coming out Celebrity Sep 25 Lili Reinhart says Hollywood ‘too afraid’ to greenlight lesbian vampire project Celebrity Sep 25 Carly Rae Jepsen describes moment Heated Rivalry inspired her son’s name Celebrity Sep 25 John Green ‘heartbroken’ for trans Harry Potter fans as he talks JK Rowling Current Affairs Sep 25 JD Vance claims James Talarico has a “weird obsession with children in drag” News Sep 25 Susan Sarandon, Hannah Einbinder and Caleb Hearon detained outside UN after protesting Netanyahu What to buy now Previous Next Fashion Mar 27 Connor Ives and MAC team up to re-release the iconic ‘Protect The Dolls’ t-shirt Music Mar 12 The Pussycat Dolls confirm reunion with new single and tour – how to get tickets Music Jan 23 A full guide to the 2026 Harry Styles Together, Together tour including dates and presale info Shopping Nov 24 2025 Ten truly awesome Christmas gifts you can buy to support queer-owned businesses Trans Sep 09 2025 Lush creates ‘luxurious’ trans flag bath bomb to support trans charities Tickets Jun 25 2025 Dolly Parton announces mini Las Vegas residency after wrapping her last tour almost a decade ago Shopping May 15 2025 LEGO celebrates late gay icon Keith Haring with new art set: ‘Want this so bad’ Music Apr 18 2025 Primavera Sound’s most iconic queer performances, from Troye Sivan to Ethel Cain Exclusive Previous Next Exclusive Sep 11 Ania Magliano talks SNL UK season two and anti-LGBTQ voices in comedy: ‘We do edgy in the right way’ Exclusive Sep 11 Elliot Tuttle on Blue Film’s personal inspiration, rejection and taboo: ‘It’s about loneliness’ Exclusive Sep 09 OF star Andy Lee on love for gay fans, ‘poisonous’ creators and ‘harmful’ stunts: ‘Gay men lift me up every day’ Exclusive Sep 07 Real Housewives of London spill the tea: ‘She’d go to the opening of a packet of crisps’ Opinion Sep 04 Katseye in London: A showcase of real talent deserving of the deafening screams Exclusive Sep 02 Adrian Chiarella and Joe Bird on tackling conversion therapy in gay horror Leviticus Exclusive Aug 21 Sziget Festival drag and circus troupe want audiences to feel like family Exclusive Aug 20 Gay wrestler Anthony Bowens says Heated Rivalry shows authentic life of closeted athletes Register to save articles and more. It'll only take a minute and it's free. JOIN US TODAY! Already have an account? Log in here "/> Download the PinkNews app Award winning LGBTQ+ journalism About us Editorial Policy Contact us Advertise Work for us Terms and conditions Privacy policy Privacy manager Privacy Manager