IE 11 is not supported. For an optimal experience visit our site on another browser. Skip to Content Politics U.S. News World Local New York Los Angeles Chicago Dallas-Fort Worth Philadelphia Washington, D.C. Boston Bay Area South Florida San Diego Connecticut Sports Business Health Tipline Shopping Early Prime Day Deals Subscribe Share & Save — For You Subscriber Hub Saved Newsletters Settings Profile Preferences Subscription Search Sections U.S. News Politics World Business Sports Investigations Culture & Trends Health Science Tech Weather VIDEO Photos Sudoku NBC Selected NBC Asian America NBC BLK NBC Latino NBC OUT Local New York Los Angeles Chicago Dallas-Fort Worth Philadelphia Washington, D.C. Boston Bay Area South Florida San Diego Connecticut tv Today Nightly News Meet the Press Dateline Featured NBC News Now Nightly Films Stay Tuned Special Features Newsletters Podcasts Listen Now Business in America More From NBC NBC.COM NBCU Academy Peacock NEXT STEPS FOR VETS NBC News Site Map Help Follow NBC News news Alerts There are no new alerts at this time Search Facebook Twitter Email SMS Blue Sky Whatsapp Print Reddit Flipboard Pinterest Linkedin Latest Stories Politics U.S. News World Sports Business Health Tipline Shopping OUT Politics and Policy University of Maine complies with policies restricting trans sports participation The university’s announcement came after the U.S. Department of Agriculture suspended the school system's funding for research and programs. The University of Maine in Orono, Maine. Getty Images Share Add NBC News to Google March 21, 2025, 10:50 PM EDT  /  Updated   March 24, 2025, 9:10 AM EDT By Joe Kottke The University of Maine System said Friday that it was found to be in compliance with federal and state laws, as well as NCAA rules that were changed following President Donald Trump’s executive order to prohibit transgender women and girls from competing in female sports. The confirmation came after the Trump administration had previously said an  investigation had found  Maine’s Department of Education  violated Title IX , which bans sex-based discrimination in educational programs that receive federal funding, and that the  Department of Agriculture would be  suspend ing f ed eral funds  t o  the University of Maine System while it investigated potential Title IX violations.  “We are relieved to put the Department’s Title IX compliance review behind us so the land-grant University of Maine and our statewide partners can continue to leverage USDA and other essential federal funds to strengthen and grow our natural resource economy and dependent rural communities through world-class education, research and extension,” Dannel Malloy, the system’s chancellor, said in a statement to NBC News. In the 2024 fiscal year, UMS, which comprises seven universities across the state, received almost $30 million in USDA funding, according to the school system. The statement from UMS followed an announcement from the USDA on Wednesday that said the university system “clearly communicated its compliance with Title IX’s requirement to protect equal opportunities for women and girls to compete in safe and fair sports, as articulated in President Donald J. Trump’s Executive Order.” Trump’s transgender sports order , which he signed last month, prohibits trans women and girls from participating in female sports and states that the federal government will rescind funds from educational programs that don’t comply. The order, which refers to trans women as men, says that having trans women in female sports “is demeaning, unfair, and dangerous to women and girls, and denies women and girls the equal opportunity to participate and excel in competitive sports.” The USDA   temporarily paused  UMS’ funding, the system said in a news release on March 11. In an email, the USDA’s Office of the Chief Financial Officer said it was evaluating “if it should take any follow-on actions related to prospective Title VI or Title IX violations,” according to the release. “USDA is committed to upholding the President’s executive order, meaning any institution that chooses to disregard it can count on losing future funding,” U.S. Secretary of Agriculture Brooke Rollins said last month, according to a news release . Samantha Warren, UMS’ chief external and governmental affairs officer, said Maine’s public universities have always been compliant with state and federal laws and with NCAA rules, and the system “remained compliant when the NCAA updated its rules in February.” In 2022, the NCAA adopted a  sport-by-sport approach  for transgender athletes, deferring to policies set by each sport’s national governing body, subject to review and recommendation by an NCAA committee. Last month, following Trump’s executive order, the college sports association updated its policy to limit “competition in women’s sports to student-athletes assigned female at birth only.” CORRECTION (March 24, 2025, 9:10 a.m. ET): A previous version of this article misstated which Maine institution was found to be in violation of Title IX. It was the Maine Department of Education, not the University of Maine System. Share Add NBC News to Google Joe Kottke Joe Kottke is an assignment editor at NBC News covering breaking news across the Americas, including politics, immigration, crime and severe weather. About Contact Help Careers Ad Choices Privacy Policy Your Privacy Choices CA Notice Terms of Service NBC News Subscription Terms of Service NBC News Sitemap Closed Captioning Subscribe Advertise NBC Selected © 2026 NBCUniversal Media, LLC