Niger | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Niger At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? No Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? No Legal Gender Recognition Possible? No LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? No Last Update: March 12, 2026 In March 2025, Niger explicitly outlawed consensual same-sex sexual acts between adults for the first time. “Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, intersex, asexual (LGBTQIA+) practices or any other unnatural behavior” are now prohibited under Article 25 of the Charter of Refoundation , adopted by the military junta almost two years after seizing power in July 2023. The charter governs public life in the country during a five-year transition period. As of writing, there are still no specific penalties for “LGBTQIA+ practices,” but a draft penal code circulated in 2023 seeks to impose maximum prison sentences of five years for engaging in or attempting same-sex sexual conduct, 20 years for conducting, officiating, or being a witness to a same-sex marriage ceremony, and five years for participating in or financing organizations “for homosexuals.” Even before the adoption of this charter, in at least one case in 2023, authorities prosecuted two women for alleged same-sex intimacy under penal provisions punishing “public indecency” with up to three years of imprisonment (Article 276); when a judge acquitted them, the Ministry of Justice reassigned him to an administrative role in an apparent disciplinary measure. In addition, the existing penal code sets an unequal age of consent , fixing it at 21 for same-sex sexual acts (Article 282) and 13 for different-sex sexual acts (Article 278). The military junta has sought to fuel moral panic around gender and sexuality, with the Education Minister declaring in October 2023 that the government intended to crack down on alleged attempts by “satanic circles, in collaboration with a foreign power and a small group of greedy Nigeriens” to introduce “LGBT practices and discourse” in the country, “particularly in the education sector.” Trans people cannot change their legal gender markers in Niger. Intersex infants and children are not protected from nonconsensual medical interventions. LGBTIQ organizations exist in the country but cannot legally register and have to operate in secret , and the transition to military rule and increased targeting of human rights activists have likely made LGBTIQ organizing more difficult. The 2021-2023 Afrobarometer ranks Niger among the worst countries in the world in terms of acceptance of sexual diversity, with 94.2 percent of respondents in the country claiming that they would dislike having “homosexuals” as neighbors. A 2022 survey showed that only 15 percent of respondents in Niger believed that the country was a good place for lesbian and gay people to live in. LGBT+ asylum seekers from other African countries who were stranded in Niger reported in 2022 that they were “living like prisoners” due to rampant discrimination and harassment. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International