Police in Moldova use tear gas on anti-LGBT protesters trying to disrupt Pride march | PinkNews About Us Advertise Work with us Login Register Latest News View all UK US World Health Politics Sport Business Culture View all TV Film Celebrity Drag Theatre Music Gaming Lifestyle View all Beauty Careers Fashion Relationships Travel Shopping View all Deals Recommended Fashion & Beauty Tickets Video View all News & Politics Entertainment Lifestyle Discover Trans Awareness Week Drag Race Explainers The Queer Agenda Toggle menu Account Register Login Current Affairs Police in Moldova use tear gas on anti-LGBT protesters trying to disrupt Pride march May 22 2018 Written by Nick Duffy Share Save for later Comment Police in Moldova fired tear gas at anti-LGBT protesters to keep them away from a Pride march. LGBT activists feared a repeat of violent scenes at the annual Moldova Pride solidarity march, which took place in the country’s capital Chisinau on May 19. Last year’s march was marred by clashes between anti-LGBT Orthodox Christian protesters and the LGBT activists – with the country’s President Igar Dodon publicly hitting out at the LGBT event. However, this year’s event enjoyed a significant level of police protection, preventing further clashes. Radio Free Europe reports that the protesters “were fended off by police who deployed tear gas,” as the Pride march progressed – with LGBT activists carrying foam hearts. The protection for the event comes after 20 embassies signed a statement of support for the LGBT march. The missions of Argentina, Belgium, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Lithuania, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, United Kingdom and United States signed the statement, which was issued on International Day Against Homophobia, Transphobia and Biphobia (May 17). (GENDERDOC-M) It said: “We express our support for lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) persons in the Republic of Moldova. “We note that the 17th LGBTI Festival ‘Moldova Pride’ is currently taking place. “As the values of tolerance and respect for diversity are fundamental to open democratic societies, we recognize the right of LGBTI-persons and their supporters to conduct the Solidarity March on 19 May 2018 peacefully. “Each day, individuals face discrimination because of their sexual orientation or gender identity. Our governments seek to combat such discrimination by promoting the human rights of all. (GENDERDOC-M) “Everyone, including lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons should be free to enjoy the rights and freedoms to which all individuals everywhere are entitled. “We look forward to a peaceful and safe Solidarity March and continued progress toward equality for all persons in Moldova.” Moldova, an eastern European former Soviet state, has previous faced calls for a Russia-style ban on so-called “gay propaganda.” A country-wide gay propaganda law was adopted for a period of three months in 2013, but was overturned as the country sought closer relations with the EU , which does not permit the legislation. (GENDERDOC-M) Speaking at an anti-LGBT event last year, Moldovan President Igar Dodon said: “I have never promised to be the president of the gays, they should have elected their own president. “They cannot and will not be accepted by me personally, neither by the entire society.” Amnesty International described his comments as a “serious violation of Moldova’s constitution, which bans the head of state from inciting hate and obliges him to respect the rights of every Moldovan citizen.” More: Europe Gay LGBT March Moldova Moldova Pride Queer News. Straight Up. The LGBTQ+ stories you don’t want to miss, delivered to your inbox daily. Email address required Must be valid email Register By registering you agree to our Privacy Policy Thanks for registering! You can update your email subscriptions at any time in the My profile section of your account. Dec 01 2023 16 TV stars you grew up watching who later came out as LGBTQ+ Related articles UK Jul 02 2023 Pride in London: Protesters target government, polluters and dictators Pride Jun 27 2023 Hundreds detained at banned Pride marches in Turkey: ‘They are aware of our strength’ Pride Jun 25 2023 More than 60 people detained at Istanbul Pride as thousands defy ban to march Pride Sep 13 2022 Beleaguered EuroPride march banned by Serbian police amid mass anti-LGBTQ+ protests World Mar 08 2022 LGBT+ people are facing a dire situation in Turkey. This is how it got so bad, and why you should care Latest News Previous Next Celebrity Sep 25 Trans influencer calls out Nikki Glaser for stand-up joke about what’s ‘in her pants’ Culture Sep 25 Trans pro wrestling trailblazer Gisele Shaw signs exclusive NWA contract Bisexual Sep 25 The Traitors star Freddie Fraser’s mum’s emotional response to his coming out Celebrity Sep 25 Lili Reinhart says Hollywood ‘too afraid’ to greenlight lesbian vampire project Celebrity Sep 25 Carly Rae Jepsen describes moment Heated Rivalry inspired her son’s name Celebrity Sep 25 John Green ‘heartbroken’ for trans Harry Potter fans as he talks JK Rowling Current Affairs Sep 25 JD Vance claims James Talarico has a “weird obsession with children in drag” News Sep 25 Susan Sarandon, Hannah Einbinder and Caleb Hearon detained outside UN after protesting Netanyahu What to buy now Previous Next Fashion Mar 27 Connor Ives and MAC team up to re-release the iconic ‘Protect The Dolls’ t-shirt Music Mar 12 The Pussycat Dolls confirm reunion with new single and tour – how to get tickets Music Jan 23 A full guide to the 2026 Harry Styles Together, Together tour including dates and presale info Shopping Nov 24 2025 Ten truly awesome Christmas gifts you can buy to support queer-owned businesses Trans Sep 09 2025 Lush creates ‘luxurious’ trans flag bath bomb to support trans charities Tickets Jun 25 2025 Dolly Parton announces mini Las Vegas residency after wrapping her last tour almost a decade ago Shopping May 15 2025 LEGO celebrates late gay icon Keith Haring with new art set: ‘Want this so bad’ Music Apr 18 2025 Primavera Sound’s most iconic queer performances, from Troye Sivan to Ethel Cain Exclusive Previous Next Exclusive Sep 11 Ania Magliano talks SNL UK season two and anti-LGBTQ voices in comedy: ‘We do edgy in the right way’ Exclusive Sep 11 Elliot Tuttle on Blue Film’s personal inspiration, rejection and taboo: ‘It’s about loneliness’ Exclusive Sep 09 OF star Andy Lee on love for gay fans, ‘poisonous’ creators and ‘harmful’ stunts: ‘Gay men lift me up every day’ Exclusive Sep 07 Real Housewives of London spill the tea: ‘She’d go to the opening of a packet of crisps’ Opinion Sep 04 Katseye in London: A showcase of real talent deserving of the deafening screams Exclusive Sep 02 Adrian Chiarella and Joe Bird on tackling conversion therapy in gay horror Leviticus Exclusive Aug 21 Sziget Festival drag and circus troupe want audiences to feel like family Exclusive Aug 20 Gay wrestler Anthony Bowens says Heated Rivalry shows authentic life of closeted athletes Register to save articles and more. It'll only take a minute and it's free. JOIN US TODAY! Already have an account? Log in here "/> Download the PinkNews app Award winning LGBTQ+ journalism About us Editorial Policy Contact us Advertise Work for us Terms and conditions Privacy policy Privacy manager Privacy Manager