Costa Rica | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Costa Rica At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Legal Gender Recognition Possible? Yes LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? Yes Last Update: March 12, 2026 Costa Rica has made significant progress in advancing LGBTIQ people’s human rights in the last decade. Despite the fact that the Catholic Church holds significant cultural and social influence in the country, as it is its official religion , same-sex sexual relations have been legal since 1971, and Costa Rica became the first country in Central America to recognize marriage equality in 2020. Since 2018, transgender individuals have been able to change their legal gender on official documents without requiring surgical or judicial intervention, upholding the principle of self-determination . Executive Decree N° 41173-MP, enacted in 2018, instructs public institutions to update official documents and records to reflect individuals’ self-perceived gender identity, thus promoting equality and nondiscrimination. Additionally, the state health system funds gender-affirming health care. In recent years, this progressive agenda has faced increasing resistance and paralysis driven by conservative political and religious actors, particularly in the context of debates such as the bill to eradicate so‑called “conversion therapies” and broader efforts to advance comprehensive protections for LGBTIQ people. The bill was introduced in 2018 and received a committee report in 2019, but it has not been debated by the full Legislative Assembly since then, effectively remaining stalled in Congress. This backlash has also taken concrete administrative form, as seen in the 2025 decision by education authorities to eliminate the Comprehensive Affectivity and Sexuality Education Program and the 2022 Protocol to Address Bullying Against LGBT Students in Educational Centers, dismantling key tools for inclusion in schools and signaling a broader attempt to roll back institutional safeguards against discrimination and violence. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International