Cook Islands finally decriminalises homosexuality About Us Advertise Work with us Login Register Latest News View all UK US World Health Politics Sport Business Culture View all TV Film Celebrity Drag Theatre Music Gaming Lifestyle View all Beauty Careers Fashion Relationships Travel Shopping View all Deals Recommended Fashion & Beauty Tickets Video View all News & Politics Entertainment Lifestyle Discover Trans Awareness Week Drag Race Explainers The Queer Agenda Toggle menu Account Register Login Law Cook Islands finally decriminalises homosexuality: ‘Now we are truly equal’ Apr 17 2023 Written by Amelia Hansford Share Save for later Comment The Cook Islands have become the latest country to decriminalise homosexuality. (Facebook) LGBTQ+ residents in the Cook Islands are celebrating after the country became the latest part of the world to decriminalise homosexuality. Queer News. Straight Up. The LGBTQ+ stories you don’t want to miss, delivered to your inbox daily. Email address required Must be valid email Register By registering you agree to our Privacy Policy Thanks for registering! You can update your email subscriptions at any time in the My profile section of your account. The South Pacific island state’s parliament voted on Friday (14 April) to remove a law which prohibited so-called “indecent acts between males” in what has been described as a “historic day” for LGBTQ+ people. The law, which was never actually enforced, saw those in violation facing a potential prison sentence of up to 10 years under the 1969 Crimes Act. The outdated law was nullified and removed by the newly introduced Crimes Amendment Bill, which will come into effect on 1 June. Additionally, a note within the bill said it was considered due to a growing acceptance of LGBTQ+ people. It will also provide protections for victims of sexual abuse, assault, rape, and other crimes. A historical day in Parliament as my Party has fulfilled its pledge to stomp out discrimination of the LGBT community in our society and to uphold our Constitutional commitments to human rights. pic.twitter.com/u1nuwOEBYl — Mark Brown (@MarkBrownPM) April 15, 2023 Prime minister Mark Brown said he was pleased that parliament could agree to “stomp out discrimination of the LGBT community” in a tweet shortly following the decision. Nov 29 2023 56 celebrities you didn’t know are gay, bisexual or lesbian The leader of the Cook Islands Party said he was dedicated to upholding “our Constitutional commitments to human rights.” The bill saw support across Cook Island’s major political parties, who shared a cross-partisan belief that the law needed to be updated to reflect the island’s view on LGBTQ+ rights. Pride Cook Island president Karla Eggelton also commended parliament for the historic decision, telling New Zealand publication RNZ that it was a long time coming. “We are so grateful for all the people and all the organisations throughout our community who have been working tirelessly to make this happen,” she said. “I think the message that we want to tell people is – hug your friend, hug your neighbour, hug your niece, hug your daughter, because now we are truly equal.” A draft of the bill was introduced in 2017 but faced multiple roadblocks from politicians voicing vaguely held “concerns” over decriminalising homosexuality. It eventually passed through blockades after parliament faced criticisms from pro-LGBTQ+ activists in 2019 for not upholding its promise to decriminalise homosexuality. While homosexuality will be legal following the enactment of the law, same-sex marriage is still outlawed by the Marriage Amendment Act 2000. Currently, there are 66 countries in the world that criminalise private, consensual same-sex activity , eleven of which use the death penalty as punishment. The most recent country to legalise homosexual activity was Barbados in December 2022 , when laws against “gross indecency” were deemed unconstitutional and removed from the Sexual Offences Act. More: cook islands gay sex Please login or register to comment on this story. Related articles World Oct 21 2025 Japan’s first female prime minister Sanae Takaichi opposes equal marriage World Jul 09 2025 All 65 countries where it’s illegal to be LGBTQ+ in 2025, including the UAE and Mali US May 22 2025 Texas finally votes to repeal law banning ‘homosexual conduct’ Video Jun 07 2024 New South Wales becomes last Australian state to apologise for criminalising homosexuality World Jun 05 2024 One-third of the world still criminalises consensual same-sex acts Latest News Previous Next Celebrity Sep 25 Trans influencer calls out Nikki Glaser for stand-up joke about what’s ‘in her pants’ Culture Sep 25 Trans pro wrestling trailblazer Gisele Shaw signs exclusive NWA contract Bisexual Sep 25 The Traitors star Freddie Fraser’s mum’s emotional response to his coming out Celebrity Sep 25 Lili Reinhart says Hollywood ‘too afraid’ to greenlight lesbian vampire project Celebrity Sep 25 Carly Rae Jepsen describes moment Heated Rivalry inspired her son’s name Celebrity Sep 25 John Green ‘heartbroken’ for trans Harry Potter fans as he talks JK Rowling Current Affairs Sep 25 JD Vance claims James Talarico has a “weird obsession with children in drag” News Sep 25 Susan Sarandon, Hannah Einbinder and Caleb Hearon detained outside UN after protesting Netanyahu What to buy now Previous Next Fashion Mar 27 Connor Ives and MAC team up to re-release the iconic ‘Protect The Dolls’ t-shirt Music Mar 12 The Pussycat Dolls confirm reunion with new single and tour – how to get tickets Music Jan 23 A full guide to the 2026 Harry Styles Together, Together tour including dates and presale info Shopping Nov 24 2025 Ten truly awesome Christmas gifts you can buy to support queer-owned businesses Trans Sep 09 2025 Lush creates ‘luxurious’ trans flag bath bomb to support trans charities Tickets Jun 25 2025 Dolly Parton announces mini Las Vegas residency after wrapping her last tour almost a decade ago Shopping May 15 2025 LEGO celebrates late gay icon Keith Haring with new art set: ‘Want this so bad’ Music Apr 18 2025 Primavera Sound’s most iconic queer performances, from Troye Sivan to Ethel Cain Exclusive Previous Next Exclusive Sep 11 Ania Magliano talks SNL UK season two and anti-LGBTQ voices in comedy: ‘We do edgy in the right way’ Exclusive Sep 11 Elliot Tuttle on Blue Film’s personal inspiration, rejection and taboo: ‘It’s about loneliness’ Exclusive Sep 09 OF star Andy Lee on love for gay fans, ‘poisonous’ creators and ‘harmful’ stunts: ‘Gay men lift me up every day’ Exclusive Sep 07 Real Housewives of London spill the tea: ‘She’d go to the opening of a packet of crisps’ Opinion Sep 04 Katseye in London: A showcase of real talent deserving of the deafening screams Exclusive Sep 02 Adrian Chiarella and Joe Bird on tackling conversion therapy in gay horror Leviticus Exclusive Aug 21 Sziget Festival drag and circus troupe want audiences to feel like family Exclusive Aug 20 Gay wrestler Anthony Bowens says Heated Rivalry shows authentic life of closeted athletes Register to save articles and more. It'll only take a minute and it's free. JOIN US TODAY! Already have an account? Log in here "/> Download the PinkNews app Award winning LGBTQ+ journalism About us Editorial Policy Contact us Advertise Work for us Terms and conditions Privacy policy Privacy manager Privacy Manager