Annual Hate Crime Report “Transphobia and Homophobia in Serbia 2024” Presented - Da se zna Home About Us Contact News Projects Publications Report incidents Donate Home About Us Contact News Projects Publications Report incidents Donate Home About Us Contact News Projects Publications Report incidents Donate Annual Hate Crime Report “Transphobia and Homophobia in Serbia 2024” Presented by Da se Zna! News 02/09/2025 Association Da se zna! today presented its 8th annual report on incidents motivated by homophobia and transphobia in Serbia, titled “Transphobia and Homophobia in Serbia 2024”, at the European House. The report contains both quantitative and qualitative analyses of incidents (hate speech, hate crimes, and discrimination) targeting LGBT+ people in Serbia during 2024. The total number of incidents motivated by homophobia and transphobia last year was 105, representing the highest number of hate-motivated incidents against LGBT+ individuals since Da se zna! began monitoring and documenting hate speech, hate crimes, and discrimination against LGBT+ people. At the opening of the event, remarks were given by Plamena Halacheva, Deputy Head of the European Union Delegation to Serbia, Janos Babic, Head of the Council of Europe Mission in Belgrade, and Bojan Lazić, Executive Director of Da se zna!. Following the report presentation, a panel discussion was held on various aspects of advancing LGBT+ rights in Serbia. Panelists included Brankica Janković, Commissioner for the Protection of Equality; Velimir Milošev, Chair of the Board of the National Youth Council of Serbia; Ivana Jelača, Executive Director of the Institute for Media and Diversity – Western Balkans; and Aleksa Savić, Executive Director of Grupa IZAĐI. The event was organized with the support of FNF Western Balkans, the European Union Delegation to Serbia, and the European House. Share: Related Posts Community Talks Held During Pride Week Discussion on the Legal Recognition of Same-Sex Partnerships Held During Pride Week Discussion on LGBTI+ Rights in Serbia’s EU Accession Process Held During Pride Week Recent News Community Talks Held During Pride Week 09/09/2026 Discussion on the Legal Recognition of Same-Sex Partnerships Held During Pride Week 09/09/2026 Discussion on LGBTI+ Rights in Serbia’s EU Accession Process Held During Pride Week 09/09/2026 Categories Author texts News Search Radoslava Grujica 3, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia dasezna@dasezna.lgbt Web Design & Development KONEKT DIGITAL © 2016 – 2026 All Rights Reserved