Civil groups urge Terengganu authorities to remove anti-LGBT signboards, warn of human rights violations | Malay Mail Our Facebook page link Our Twitter page link Our Instagram page link Our Tiktok page link Our Youtube page link About Us Advertise Home MALAYSIA SINGAPORE MONEY WORLD LIFE EAT/DRINK SHOWBIZ OPINION SPORTS TECH/GADGETS What You Think 精彩大马 ARCHIVES ABOUT US PRIVACY POLICY TERMS OF USE ADVERTISE 精彩大马 Enter a word Most Read Sports / 17 h ago Pearly Tan-Thinaah end Malaysia’s 12-year wait for Asian Games women’s doubles medal Malaysia / 16 h ago Foreign male dancers nabbed as Immigration raids Jalan Klang Lama club charging patrons up to RM700 Malaysia / 11 h ago JPJ seizes 3,790 luxury vehicles worth RM550m in nationwide crackdown since June 2025 Malaysia / 12 h ago BN chairman Zahid says coalition will end ties with Pakatan once Parliament dissolves Malaysia / 11 h ago Calls unanswered, woman forces entry and finds fiancé dead in Melaka home Malaysia / 10 h ago RM1b resort, 700 jobs: Papar’s first five-star hotel due in 2027 Malaysia / 17 h ago Melaka Pakatan wraps up seat talks, awaits final approval from presidential council Malaysia / 13 h ago UiTM Holdings under MACC spotlight as RM42m solar project payment questioned Malaysia / 17 h ago ‘No contradiction’: Abang Johari explains why EC says no Sarawak seat proposal yet Malaysia / 19 h ago G25 urges Negeri Sembilan MB Ismail Lasim to resign after flip‑flops on Ruler’s removal Malaysia / 11 h ago Amanah sets sights on 18 seats for GE16, but concedes it could lose all but one Malaysia / 14 h ago One-third formula first, more seats later, Sabah and Sarawak politicians tell Putrajaya Malaysia / 17 h ago Kuching South mayor lodges police report over ‘malicious’ remarks against him, family Malaysia / 18 h ago Anwar: Najib case does not change govt’s stance on corruption, those who plunder nation’s wealth must answer for it Malaysia / 12 h ago Do not compare Penang’s mega projects with one year of Sabah road funding, state PKR tells PAS rival Malaysia Civil groups urge Terengganu authorities to remove anti-LGBT signboards, warn of human rights violations Justice for Sisters and 12 other civil society organisations have urged the Kuala Terengganu City Council to immediately remove signboards bearing anti-LGBT messages, condemning them as discriminatory and a form of hate speech under international human rights law. — AFP pic Stay updated on the latest news and insights. Subscribe to our newsletter here Earn a fixed rate of up to 4.2%* p.a. for 210 days with Versa Save ! Plus, enjoy an additional FREE RM10 when you sign up using code VERSAMM10 with a min. cash-in of RM100 today. T&Cs apply. Make Malay Mail your preferred source on Google Giving you news that matter to Malaysians. Make Malay Mail your preferred source when you search for news on Google. By Malay Mail First Published: Wednesday, 14 May 2025 2:47 PM MYT Last Modified: Wednesday, 14 May 2025 3:08 PM MYT × Subscribe to Newsletter Subscribe KUALA LUMPUR, May 14 — Justice for Sisters (JFS) and 12 other civil society organisations have urged the Kuala Terengganu City Council to immediately remove signboards bearing anti-LGBT messages, condemning them as discriminatory and a form of hate speech under international human rights law. They also criticised a statement by the Terengganu state executive councillor defending the signboards as a campaign against homosexual behaviour, saying this incites hatred and promotes discrimination against LGBTQ individuals. “The state’s actions are clearly aimed at advocating hatred and discrimination, and cannot be justified under any circumstances,” the groups wrote in a statement , pointing to a troubling pattern of state-sanctioned persecution of LGBTQ people in Terengganu. In 2018, two women were caned in public for attempting musahaqah (sexual relations between women), while amendments to the Syariah Criminal Offences Enactment in 2022 introduced criminal provisions targeting transgender and gender-diverse individuals. JFS said it continues to receive reports of arrests, harassment and surveillance of LGBTQ people in Terengganu, including raids on private events and homes under multi-agency operations targeting individuals based on appearance and identity. They argued that such actions are unconstitutional, violating LGBTQ people’s rights to equality, dignity, and freedom from discrimination under Articles 5, 8, and 10 of the Federal Constitution, and compromising access to education guaranteed under Article 12. A recent study by JFS involving 10 LGBTQ individuals in Terengganu found all had experienced discrimination or violence, with 70 per cent subjected to conversion practices by family members, religious authorities, or others. The study revealed severe mental health impacts, with 60 per cent reporting increased psychological distress due to discrimination and 40 per cent saying they had experienced suicidal thoughts, including one person who attempted suicide after being outed. Many respondents highlighted the role of state policies in enabling societal discrimination, with some choosing self-isolation or migration as coping mechanisms, and called for more public awareness and legal reforms to protect LGBTQ rights. The groups also warned against the misuse of religion to justify discrimination, citing international experts who have condemned the invocation of religious beliefs to legitimise hostility against LGBTQ people. They referenced the Beirut Declaration on “Faith for Rights”, which emphasises that faith traditions should uphold dignity and equality without discrimination on any grounds. The coalition called on Suhakam and the Minister of Higher Education to initiate dialogue with the city council and Terengganu state authorities to remove the signboards and address their discriminatory implications. You May Also Like Related Articles Malaysia / 8 h ago Family spokesman: Malaysia sought wider Nepal search for 55 uncontactable citizens, but access was limited Malaysia / 9 h ago Man dies of rabies in Kedah’s first human case in 28 years Malaysia / 9 h ago All Malaysian Indian Progressive Front seeks BN membership — and a shot at contesting Penang seats Just IN 8 h ago Family spokesman: Malaysia sought wider Nepal search for 55 uncontactable citizens, but access was limited 9 h ago Man dies of rabies in Kedah’s first human case in 28 years 9 h ago All Malaysian Indian Progressive Front seeks BN membership — and a shot at contesting Penang seats News Malaysia Singapore World Money Life Eat/Drink Showbiz Opinion What You Think Sports Tech/Gadgets About ARCHIVES ABOUT US PRIVACY POLICY TERMS OF USE ADVERTISE Download Subscribe to Newsletter Subscribe © 2026, Malay Mail, All Rights Reserved. ↑