Mhelody Bruno's killer was jailed for 22 months. This is the information the court never heard - ABC News Skip to main content Skip to news navigation, settings and search Explore the ABC More from ABC Close menu ABC ABC News ABC iview ABC listen Kids & Students Indigenous Information & Services Editorial Policies Read our editorial guiding principles Follow the ABC news iview listen Loading ABC News Just In For You Politics World Business Analysis Sport Lifestyle Entertainment Quizzes More Search News Home Just In For You Analysis Rural Watch Live Health Indigenous Politics Science Deep Time Elections World Environment Investigations Business Local news Quizzes Sport AFL NRL Football Tennis Cricket Netball Lifestyle Wellbeing Relationships & Family Food & Recipes Personal Finance Home & Garden Entertainment TV & Movies Books Music Pop Culture Arts Facebook YouTube Instagram Twitter Emergency Backstory Newsletters 中文新闻 BERITA BAHASA INDONESIA TOK PISIN Appearance (BETA) Follow system settings Select an option Always light Always dark Follow system settings ABC iView ABC Listen ABC News News Home Mhelody Bruno's killer was jailed for 22 months. This is the information the court never heard Share Share article Mhelody Bruno's killer was jailed for 22 months. This is the information the court never heard By Elise Kinsella and Andy Burns Background Briefing Topic: Homicide Posted Fri 2 Jul 2021 at 5:06am Fri 2 Jul 2021 at 5:06am Fri 2 Jul 2021 at 5:06am , updated Fri 2 Jul 2021 at 9:22am Fri 2 Jul 2021 at 9:22am Fri 2 Jul 2021 at 9:22am A court found Mhelody Bruno was strangled during an act of consensual sexual choking and sentenced her killer to 22 months in jail. ( Supplied ) abc.net.au/news/background-briefing-mhelody-bruno-investigation/100256330 Link copied Share Share article It was a video call so disturbing Jay* still tears up when she remembers it. It was late at night in Wagga Wagga, in regional New South Wales, the last time Jay would see her friend Mhelody alive. "I saw her laying on the bed in the background with her back towards the camera," Jay says, recounting the video call. Someone had picked up Mhelody's phone, a man Jay didn't recognise. Mhelody seemed to be unresponsive. "I remember he was extremely angry and yelling. He did say that he will rape Mhelody and give her AIDS." Warning: The following story contains content that some readers may find confronting. About eight hours after that video call, Mhelody was choked unconscious. The next day she was dead. Mhelody Bruno was a 25-year-old transgender woman from the Philippines who had come to Australia around six weeks earlier seeking love. Rian Toyer, a man she had been dating, told police he accidentally killed her in an act of consensual sexual strangulation gone wrong, for which he received a 22-month jail term . Filipino transgender woman Mhelody Bruno was visiting Australia when she was killed. ( Supplied ) Toyer's guilty plea meant his manslaughter case went straight to sentencing without the need for a trial. Certain information never made it to court, including Jay's account of the video call, which means the strength of it was never tested. A joint Background Briefing and ABC Regional investigation has found more pieces of information that were not seen by the court, including ambulance logs, a first-responder statement, medical records and an autopsy report. Whether the information would have made a difference to the sentencing is not known. Former Supreme Court Judge Anthony Whealy, who oversaw some of NSW's most high-profile criminal trials, reviewed the information the ABC has gathered. "There is certainly an argument to say that a miscarriage of justice may have occurred here," he says. "Unfortunately, we don't know enough about all the detail, we're commenting on bits and pieces as it were, but they are all pretty important bits and pieces. "And putting them all together I think at the very least you could say they reveal this was a much more serious manslaughter than the Judge envisaged it to be." A young woman with big dreams Mhelody's friend Airah stands in front of the Bruno family's home outside Manila. ( Supplied ) Mhelody Bruno grew up in the Philippines in a small home on the outskirts of Manila. Her childhood friend Airah remembers how they would eat mangoes and "iced candy" and climb onto the flat tin roof of Mhelody's family home. They shared a love of music and fashion. Then, as teenagers, they both transitioned to female. "[Mhelody] would play loud music and we would wear women's clothing and model them here inside," Airah says. "We would practise and ask each other [beauty] pageant questions." Mhelody was passionate about beauty pageants. ( Supplied ) Mhelody's mother Avelina Bruno recalls how Mhelody struck out on her own in Manila after finishing her studies, renting her own home and sending money back to the family. "I said to myself, 'this child has big dreams,'" Avelina says. Airah and Mhelody remained close friends. "When [Mhelody] hears music we get surprised and she suddenly dances, then we'll all laugh, that is what we do often," Airah remembers. Mhelody cared deeply about beauty pageants. In one promotional video she says entering a pageant is about more than just winning. "I want to send a message that [our] industry celebrates diversity and equality, that we LGBT can also excel in this industry," Mhelody says. While Mhelody had a full life in Manila, Airah says she was looking for more. What Mhelody really wanted was a long-term boyfriend. "She didn't want a Filipino, she wanted a foreigner," Airah says. "If it's a Filipino, she will not be loved genuinely, unlike foreigners where you feel the care and genuine love and what they say about equality when it comes to love." Looking for love Mhelody met Andy online and the pair shared a long-distance romance. Then in August 2019, Mhelody came to Australia to spend time with Andy. ( Supplied ) Andy, from the NSW town of Wagga Wagga, first met Mhelody through an international dating site. He visited the Philippines twice to see Mhelody but largely they shared a long-distance romance. Mhelody would leave him loving messages. "Hey honey how are you doing?" she asks in one of them. "So I just got home from work and I just think of you and I don't know, I am missing you. "And I just want you to know my feelings for you are real and I love you." After they had been together for almost a year, the couple organised for Mhelody to come to Australia for three weeks in August 2019. She stayed at Andy's farmhouse outside of Wagga and the pair visited Sydney and the snowfields. But there were tensions in the relationship. By the time Andy dropped Mhelody off at Wagga airport to fly home, he admits he was relieved. Mhelody and Andy had fun on a trip to Sydney and the snow. ( Supplied ) "It had been a bit of a topsy-turvy sort of experience this time around," he says. "I was pretty desperate to get her on the flight and say, 'Look, see you later, and we'll see where we are once you are back home.'" They continued to chat online, Andy assuming Mhelody was back in the Philippines the whole time. Then three weeks later he got a knock on the door. It was the police. They told him Mhelody had died at Wagga Base Hospital. "I said, 'No way, Mhelody is back in Manila, I can prove it to you,'" Andy recalls. What Andy didn't know was that Mhelody had not gone home to the Philippines. She had other plans. Friends say she went back to Sydney and even to Queensland. And then at some point, without Andy knowing it, Mhelody returned to Wagga and took up with a new man. Agreed facts Andy would soon learn the police had charged a man with Mhelody's death, another Wagga local she met on the gay dating app Grindr. That man was Rian Toyer, a corporal in the Air Force who worked at the nearby RAAF base. Rian Toyer pleaded guilty to Mhelody's manslaughter. ( Supplied ) Andy went along to each of Toyer's court appearances for sentencing at the old brick courthouse in Wagga, "just so there'd be a witness, you know, on behalf of Mhelody," he says. There were times Andy wanted to punch Toyer. Sometimes he would shake with a cold rage. The court had accepted a set of "agreed facts", a document negotiated between the prosecutor and the defence lawyers. Watching the sentencing unfold, Andy learnt that Mhelody and Toyer had known each other for about three weeks. According to the agreed facts the court heard, on the afternoon before her death, they had a fight. Toyer kicked Mhelody out of his unit and went to a local pub. When he returned at 5pm, Mhelody was still there. The court heard the pair made up and went to another pub where they drank, before returning to Toyer's unit at 9pm. They continued drinking before going to bed. Mhelody was in a fit and communicative state that night, according to the agreed facts. They woke early the next morning and started having sex and Toyer began choking Mhelody. Rian Ross Toyer (in blue suit) leaves the Wagga Wagga court house on the 19th of March 2021. ( ABC Riverina: Isadora Bogle ) The court heard this was an existing practise that Mhelody had started during an earlier sexual encounter, when she'd placed Toyer's hands on her neck. Toyer said they never had a conversation about it but Mhelody would usually tap his arm when she wanted him to release the pressure on her neck. This time she didn't tap. The court heard that Toyer called triple-0 at 8:01am and told operators he had been performing CPR. Mhelody wasn't breathing when paramedics arrived. She died in hospital the next day, on September 22, 2019. As Andy sat there listening, it sounded plausible. But there were a couple of things he felt didn't square. For one, Mhelody never drank alcohol while they were together. Andy wondered why she had acted so differently with Toyer. Rian Toyer and Mhelody Bruno. ( Supplied ) "In my relationship with Mhelody there had never been any talk of choking or anything else like that," he says. Andy acknowledges different people can have different relationships and sex with different people, but he thought the description of Mhelody in court sounded out of character. Toyer was initially given an intensive corrections order, which meant he wouldn't have to serve time in prison. Then the judge realised he'd made a mistake by imposing a sentence that was not applicable for manslaughter in NSW. Toyer was re-sentenced to 22 months in prison, with a non-parole period of 12 months, but the judge expressed "considerable regret" that he was not permitted to spare Toyer jail time. The process left Andy unsure what to think. He felt he didn't understand the full story. It turned out he was right — there were gaps in the information the court heard about Mhelody's death that raise some questions. Three crucial hours In the hours before Mhelody was strangled, sexually explicit and derogatory messages were sent from her phone. Earlier that evening, Andy and Mhelody had been discussing a gift voucher he had sent to her. Then at 7:13pm, a message arrived simply saying "fuck off." Andy had never heard Mhelody swear before. That night a message was also sent from Mhelody's phone to one of her friends in the Philippines saying "show me your pussy". Then between 10:30pm and 11:30pm, a series of messages were sent between Mhelody's phone and Jay's brother Aaron*, describing Mhelody as "dirty" and saying she had HIV. In his statement to police, Aaron claims there were also several video calls from Mhelody's phone that night. In the first video call, a man picked up. According to Aaron, he was friendly at first. Then in one of the calls he suddenly snapped, "I have destroyed her," he started yelling, "I am going to give her HIV and I am going to destroy her arse again". Jay's brother, Aaron, received a number of explicit text messages and video calls the night before Mhelody was fatally strangled. ( Supplied ) Aaron told police he thought Mhelody looked groggy and that the man had tried to pull her pants down. Mhelody pushed the man away and pulled a doona over herself. The man then threatened to rape Mhelody again before hanging up. Aaron didn't identify the man in his statement. Aaron's mother Penny* and his sister Jay also say they were present that night and witnessed the video call. "It was so loud and abusive I got up off the couch and went over to my son and seen this man on the phone, as Jay said, he was very aggressive, abusive," Penny says. "[He was] saying that he's going to keep raping Mhel, he is going to give her AIDS. "And what was worrying me, she was on the bed not moving and normally if someone was yelling like that, they'd be moving." After Mhelody's death they saw Rian Toyer on the news and say they recognised him as the man in that video call. Penny and Jay never spoke to the police but they knew Aaron had given a formal statement, so they were shocked to learn the court never heard about the calls. It means whether or not the video call happened has never been assessed by a court. First responders The paramedics' log from the morning Mhelody was choked shows first responders arrived at Rian Toyer's unit just after 8am. It was five minutes after Toyer's triple-0 call. When Toyer met paramedics at the door he wasn't wearing any clothes, the log records. Paramedics couldn't get any information out of Toyer about whether he had been performing CPR because he was too agitated and upset. There was no evidence of CPR having been commenced, according to the paramedics. "Patient found supine on the floor, fully clothed," the paramedics noted in the log. In the agreed statement of facts heard in court, Mhelody was choked during sex and Toyer called for help as soon as he realised something was wrong. It was never mentioned that Mhelody was recorded as being found fully clothed and on the floor. These records, along with the statements paramedics made to police, also never made it into evidence. As Toyer's hearing was to decide his manslaughter sentence, the records and paramedics' statements have never been tested by the Court. Dhelia holds a portrait of her sister Mhelody. ( Supplied ) One of the paramedics who arrived at 8:15am to help with the resuscitation observed that Toyer was yelling, "Please breathe, my life is now over, I can't believe this is happening to me". The same paramedic noted Mhelody had a loose tooth, almost detached, and there appeared to be trauma around her gum. He says that during a debrief, two other paramedics also noted the loose tooth. After Mhelody was transferred to hospital, doctors and nurses continued making medical notes and records of her final day. One doctor noted Mhelody had bruising to the lower third of her neck. A nurse who cared for Mhelody noted a 7cm red mark near her spine. An autopsy performed about a week after Mhelody's death in Newcastle by NSW's Chief Forensic Pathologist Dr Isabel Brauwer doesn't note any bruising or marks to Mhelody's neck. Dr Brauwer notes a fracture to the cartilage in Mhelody's thyroid but there's no mention of a loose tooth or a 7cm red mark on her back, raising the question of whether those injuries were actually there and if they were, what caused them. NSW Health declined to speak to the ABC about Mhelody's autopsy report. The autopsy report was not considered by the court. A 'thorough investigation' Superintendent Bob Noble runs the Wagga Wagga Police Station and was the officer in charge when Mhelody died. He says police didn't form a view on why the court accepted that Toyer had performed CPR that morning, when paramedics thought that had not occurred. "There were only two people there — one was Mhelody and the other was the accused — so we didn't land anywhere on that one," he says. Superintendent Noble says police were interested to learn Mhelody was found fully dressed but "ultimately a narrative was presented to the court that they had engaged in sex that morning". Wagga Wagga police are adamant they ran a thorough investigation of Mhelody's death. ( ABC Riverina: Isadora Bogle ) "I mean those two things, they would seem to be at odds, but I drew nothing from it because I think it is very dangerous to do so," says Superintendent Noble. "You just have to allow, firstly, investigators to interrogate all of these matters, and then obviously it is a matter for the court to add all that up." He says he couldn't speak about the video call Mhelody's friend reported but he's adamant police ran a thorough investigation. "Ultimately you can only prove what you can prove and you can't prove what the evidence doesn't substantiate," he says. "I know there will be elements of any investigation and this one will be no different where people will pick out a certain fact or piece of data and attach significant meaning to it. "That is OK to do as a lay person but ultimately prosecutors and, in this case, His Honour, had to make a finding and a sentence, and inconvenient pieces of information that may be difficult to reconcile in one's mind don't necessarily constitute grounds for a different finding." The Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions NSW released a statement to the ABC, saying it could not discuss material that was not adduced in court proceedings. Hundreds attended Mhelody's funeral in the Philippines. ( Supplied ) The ODPP said it had "formed a view about the forensic value of each piece of evidence in the police brief" and whether it was relevant and admissible in the sentencing hearing. But evidence that would lead to a higher sentence has to be "established by the prosecution beyond a reasonable doubt" and that "suspicion about an issue is not sufficient". Rian Toyer declined to speak to the ABC, as did his solicitor Zac Tankard. His barrister, Mark Dennis, did not respond to the ABC. 'Has justice been done?' Retired Supreme Court Judge Anthony Whealy says much less evidence is usually heard in a sentencing hearing than a trial but believes the court should have been told about the video calls. "You have a picture that is painted by the agreed facts that is more or less a happy couple, going to sleep for the night, they have probably had a bit too much to drink but they are more or less happy and communicating freely," he says. But Aaron's statement paints "a completely different and rather horrifying picture of an unravelling relationship, one beset with hostility and aggression," he says. The retired judge says these omissions were significant and raise doubts over the justice process. " Has justice been done? Well there must be a question mark over that. " Mhelody's mother Avelina Bruno learnt of her daughter's death three days after she died, when Australian police tracked down Mhelody's brother in Manila. Mhelody Bruno's mother (centre) says the family were shocked by the sentence. ( Supplied ) The news was overwhelming and the legal process that followed was difficult for Avelina to understand. "The sentence was so low, as though no-one was killed," Ms Bruno says. "If [Mhelody] didn't go [to Australia] nothing would have happened, her death would not have happened, we would have been happy until now, even if we are poor." Listen to Background Briefing's full podcast investigation 'Her name was Mhelody Bruno' . *Names have been changed to protect the identity of some sources. Share options Copy link Facebook X (formerly Twitter) See more ABC coverage in your search results Make ABC a preferred source in Google Top Stories Rinehart allegedly tried to help recruit Liberal MP to join One Nation Topic: One Nation Men accused of planning terrorist attack at RAF base used to strike Iran Topic: Terrorism Banks cut rewards programs, free travel insurance amid surcharge ban Topic: Banking Migration cuts, AI and rising interest rates mean an era of long-term disinflation A Analysis by Alan Kohler Hundreds of Russian hybrid attacks serve to 'wake everyone up' in NATO Topic: Surveillance Popular now Nathan Cleary requires surgery on both feet after horrific NRL preliminary final injury Topic: NRL Banks cut rewards programs, free travel insurance amid surcharge ban Topic: Banking Rinehart allegedly tried to help recruit Liberal MP to join One Nation Topic: One Nation Related topics Homicide LGBTQIA+ Relationships Wagga Wagga Top Stories Rinehart allegedly tried to help recruit Liberal MP to join One Nation Topic: One Nation Men accused of planning terrorist attack at RAF base used to strike Iran Topic: Terrorism Banks cut rewards programs, free travel insurance amid surcharge ban Topic: Banking Migration cuts, AI and rising interest rates mean an era of long-term disinflation A Analysis by Alan Kohler Hundreds of Russian hybrid attacks serve to 'wake everyone up' in NATO Topic: Surveillance Just In Young Arrernte boxer sets sights on Olympics after AIS opportunity Topic: Boxing Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:07am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:07am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:07am Treasurer to unveil $6 billion improvement to federal budget LIVE Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:02am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:02am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:02am Wall Street closes higher, ASX lacks direction ahead of rates decision LIVE Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:59am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:59am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:59am Police launch murder probe after death west of Brisbane Topic: Homicide Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:57am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:57am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:57am More Just In Back to top ABC News Contact ABC News Your home of Australian stories, conversations and events that shape our nation. This service may include material from Agence France-Presse (AFP), APTN, Reuters, AAP, CNN and the BBC World Service which is copyright and cannot be reproduced. Follow ABC News Sections ABC News Home Just In For You Watch Live News Live ABC NewsRadio Politics Elections Australia World Sport Live Sport Rural Business Analysis Science Health Lifestyle Entertainment Quizzes More Topics News in Language Chinese 中文 Tok Pisin Berita Bahasa Indonesia Related ABC News app Local News ABC Emergency ABC Indigenous ABC Religion & Ethics ABC Asia ABC Pacific Music & Audio ABC Listen Home triple j Live Radio Movies & TV ABC iview Home List of ABC Shows Live TV TV Guide Kids & Students BTN Education Heywire Takeover ABC Kids Get the ABC News AM newsletter Get the latest ABC News delivered to your email inbox Email address Subscribe Your information is being handled in accordance with the ABC Privacy Collection Statement . All ABC newsletters Stay informed and connected with the ABC. Covering a wide range of topics and brands including News, iview, listen, and more. Browse all ABC newsletters ABC home Information & Services Editorial Policies Accessibility Help Contact Us Commercial Careers About the ABC Privacy Policy Terms of Use © 2026 ABC Follow the ABC We acknowledge Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the First Australians and Traditional Custodians of the lands where we live, learn and work.