Belgium | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Belgium At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Legal Gender Recognition Possible? Yes LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? Yes Last Update: March 12, 2026 Belgium has robust protective laws concerning LGBTIQ people. Discrimination, hate crimes, and hate speech on the basis of sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, and sex characteristics are banned. Same-sex couples can marry and adopt, and transgender people can change their legal name and gender markers based on self-determination . In 2023, Belgium adopted the first law against femicides in Europe , which also covers all forms of “gender-based homicide.” Parliament also adopted a law in 2023 prohibiting conversion practices . While addressing a serious human rights issue, the law is imperfect in its overly broad language and its reliance on a carceral approach , which itself raises human rights concerns. Medically unnecessary surgeries on intersex infants are legal despite a 2021 parliamentary resolution on intersex people’s rights. However, in an important judicial victory, the Brussels Court of Appeal held a hospital accountable for nonconsensual medical interventions performed on an intersex minor in 2023. Public opinion is generally accepting of LGBTIQ people. The 2023 Eurobarometer found that 79 percent of Belgians thought same-sex marriage should be allowed throughout Europe, and 80 percent agreed that “there is nothing wrong in a sexual relationship between two persons of the same sex.” Openly lesbian, gay, bisexual, and trans people have served in public office. At the last elections in 2024, all political parties except those from the far right introduced proposals to protect LGBTIQ people and fielded openly LGBTQ candidates for more senior positions than in the past. Despite this enabling environment, LGBTIQ people are still subject to harassment and physical violence. According to a European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights (FRA) LGBTIQ survey , in Belgium, 15 percent of respondents reported having been assaulted in the five years prior to the survey, while 67 percent said that during their time in school, they suffered bullying, ridicule, teasing, insults, or threats because they were LGBTIQ . A recent study reveals high levels of prejudice and structural barriers in health care, employment, and daily life for trans and nonbinary Belgians. In 2024, 312 cases of discrimination, hate crime, and hate speech related to sexual orientation were reported, compared to 217 in 2023, according to UNIA , an independent public institution. The report reflects a growing phenomenon of men who are being lured into traps on dating apps and thus becoming victims of gay bashing. This is only the tip of the iceberg, however, as only 14 percent of LGBTIQ people who experienced assault had reported the incident to the police . View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International