Stay informed on important LGBTQ+ news. Sign up for our email newsletter. Enter Your Email * Advocate Newsletter sign me up! Privacy Policy Terms of Use Skip to content Search & Section Navigation SUBSCRIBE TO OUT MAGAZINE With The Advocate included!
Print
Digital
Give a gift
Renew
Advocate on Facebook Advocate on BlueSky Advocate on Threads Advocate on Instagram Open Search Sign Me Up Site Navigation Politics National States Immigration Advocacy Elections News People Crime Education Religion Culture Health HIV/AIDS Mental Health Transgender Health Sexual Health Aging & Care History Opinion close Search Search
AI Powered
Human content,
AI powered search.
Latest Stories
Close Stay up to date with the latest in LGBTQ+ news with The Advocate’s email newsletter, in your inbox five days a week. Enter email I’m in! Close Search & Section Navigation Politics National States Immigration Advocacy Elections News People Crime Education Religion Culture Health HIV/AIDS Mental Health Transgender Health Sexual Health Aging & Care History Opinion OUT PRIDE THE AVOCATES PLUS OUT TRAVELER SUPPORT US SUBSCRIBE SUBSCRIBER SERVICES EMAIL NEWSLETTER SIGNUP CONTACT ABOUT US CAREER OPPORTUNITIES ADVERTISE WITH US PRIVACY POLICY PRIVACY PREFERENCES TERMS OF USE LEGAL NOTICE Follow Us: @ 2026 Equal Entertainment LLC.
All rights reserved By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Privacy Policy and Terms of Use .
Accept
Home > News >
Tennessee drag ban will stay as SCOTUS refuses to hear case, but artists 'refuse to be silenced'
The U.S. Supreme Court has refused to hear a lawsuit challenging Tennessee's drag ban, but a separate suit is still ongoing. Two drag queens performing onstage
Galdric PS/shutterstock
Ryan Adamczeski
Feb 26, 2025
Ryan Adamczeski Ryan is a reporter at The Advocate, and a graduate of New York University Tisch's Department of Dramatic Writing, with a focus in television writing and comedy. She first became a published author at the age of 15 with her YA novel "Someone Else's Stars," and is now a member of GALECA, the LGBTQ+ society of entertainment critics, and the IRE, the society of Investigative Reporters and Editors. Her first cover story, "Meet the young transgender teens changing America and the world," has been nominated for Outstanding Print Article at the 36th GLAAD Media Awards. In her free time, Ryan likes watching the New York Rangers and Minnesota Wild, listening to the Beach Boys, and practicing witchcraft. See Full Bio The U.S. Supreme Court has refused to hear a lawsuit challenging Tennessee 's drag ban, leaving in place an appeals court ruling upholding the law. The state's controversial Adult Entertainment Act, passed in 2023 , prohibits “adult cabaret entertainment” on public property or in any location where minors could view it. The law defines such entertainment as performances that are “adult-oriented” and “harmful to minors,” including acts by topless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, and “male or female impersonators.” Friends of George’s Inc., a Memphis-based theater group known for its drag performances, filed a lawsuit against the AEA, arguing that the ban is overly broad and vague, and effectively criminalizes their performances.The Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals dismissed the legal challenge in July y , claiming that the plaintiffs did not have standing to sue. The decision reversed a lower court’s ruling that had declared the law unconstitutional. A separate lawsuit against the ban is still ongoing, brought by the American Civil Liberties Union on behalf of Blount County Pride. Organizers filed the suit after District Attorney General Ryan Desmond threatened to prosecute anyone violating the law during a 2023 Pride festival. Friends of George’s denounced the Supreme Court's ruling in a statement, maintaining that "this ruling does not define us — we do. And we refuse to be silenced." See on Instagram "Friends of George’s Theatre Company will continue exercising our First Amendment right — bringing inclusive, joyful art to our community while raising thousands for charities that uphold dignity and respect for all," the group said. "Oppression is nothing new to the LGBTQ+ community. Every attempt to silence us has only made us louder, stronger, and more relentless. This moment is no different." "To our trans siblings who have led this fight from the start — you are not alone. Your courage fuels us. Your struggle is our struggle. We stand with you," they continued. "To every performer, artist, and activist — keep using your voice, your craft, your presence. Every soapbox is sacred, and we will not step off it. To our supporters, friends, and allies — this fight is bigger than us. It’s about life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness — for everyone. We will resist with joy, art, and the unshakable belief that laughter is defiance."
FROM OUR SPONSORS
The Latest
National
Testosterone-obsessed Pete Hegseth has a bank account that jumped from under $50,000 to over $1 million
Plus, he might also be a crypto bro. Jacob Ogles Opinion
Clavicular and looksmaxxing reach their sad, inevitable conclusion
Opinion: The influencer's rape charge was the inexorable outcome of worshipping at the altar of toxic masculinity, writes Josh Ackley. Josh Ackley People
Brandi Carlile recalls first time meeting Dolly Parton 10 years ago on 'Dolly Day'
Just before performing a concert to promote the "Sad Gay Version" of her latest album, Carlile paid tribute to the queen of country music, who took a risk fully accepting gay artists like herself. Dawn Ennis Culture
Soft Cell's gay frontman: Homophobia has 'taken other faces' since '80s prejudice
"Tainted Love" singer Marc Almond reflects on bandmate Dave Ball’s legacy, the golden era of NYC nightlife, and Soft Cell's final album, Danceteria . Gil Macias Stay up to date with the latest in LGBTQ+ news with The Advocate’s email newsletter, in your inbox five days a week. Enter your email I’m in! Support Independent Journalism LGBTQ+ stories deserve to be told .
Your membership powers The Advocate's original reporting—stories that inform, protect, and celebrate our
community.
Become a Member
FOR AS LITTLE AS $5. CANCEL ANYTIME. The Top 5
Gay Dutch prime minister & Zohran Mamdani visit LGBTQ+ archive — and hear from young New Yorkers it serves
Sep 24, 2026
The 50 Biggest Homophobes of the Last 50 Years
May 09, 2017
Hannah Einbinder and other LGBTQ+ celebrities arrested at anti-Netanyahu protest
Sep 24, 2026
It took Kristin Flickinger 26 years to get on Survivor. Now she’s a queer fan fave
Sep 23, 2026
City of New York found liable for ambulance hit-and-run of trans cyclist
Jul 07, 2026 Discover more The U.S. Supreme Court has refused to hear a lawsuit challenging Tennessee 's drag ban, leaving in place an appeals court ruling upholding the law. The state's controversial Adult Entertainment Act, passed in 2023 , prohibits “adult cabaret entertainment” on public property or in any location where minors could view it. The law defines such entertainment as performances that are “adult-oriented” and “harmful to minors,” including acts by topless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers, and “male or female impersonators.” Friends of George’s Inc., a Memphis-based theater group known for its drag performances, filed a lawsuit against the AEA, arguing that the ban is overly broad and vague, and effectively criminalizes their performances.The Sixth Circuit Court of Appeals dismissed the legal challenge in July y , claiming that the plaintiffs did not have standing to sue. The decision reversed a lower court’s ruling that had declared the law unconstitutional. A separate lawsuit against the ban is still ongoing, brought by the American Civil Liberties Union on behalf of Blount County Pride. Organizers filed the suit after District Attorney General Ryan Desmond threatened to prosecute anyone violating the law during a 2023 Pride festival. Friends of George’s denounced the Supreme Court's ruling in a statement, maintaining that "this ruling does not define us — we do. And we refuse to be silenced." See on Instagram "Friends of George’s Theatre Company will continue exercising our First Amendment right — bringing inclusive, joyful art to our community while raising thousands for charities that uphold dignity and respect for all," the group said. "Oppression is nothing new to the LGBTQ+ community. Every attempt to silence us has only made us louder, stronger, and more relentless. This moment is no different." "To our trans siblings who have led this fight from the start — you are not alone. Your courage fuels us. Your struggle is our struggle. We stand with you," they continued. "To every performer, artist, and activist — keep using your voice, your craft, your presence. Every soapbox is sacred, and we will not step off it. To our supporters, friends, and allies — this fight is bigger than us. It’s about life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness — for everyone. We will resist with joy, art, and the unshakable belief that laughter is defiance." From Your Site Articles Tennessee Republicans pass bill allowing marriage discrimination toward same-sex couples › Tennessee GOP quietly overturns marriage equality by giving officials the right to refuse › Tennessee Senate passes bill making 'recruiting' for trans youth care a felony › Federal appeals court upholds Tennessee drag ban › Texas A&M's drag ban blocked by federal court › Alabama House passes three anti-LGBTQ+ bills in one day › SCOTUS deadlocked in OK Catholic charter school decision › Appeals court vacates ruling blocking Texas drag ban ›
More For You
Texas A&M’s Republican drag ban gets its day in court before 17 federal judges
Jacob Ogles Sep 23, 2026 A protest sponsored by Texas A&M University Queer Empowerment Council's Day of Drag on campus in College Station on Thursday, March 6, 2025.
Elizabeth Conley/Houston Chronicle via Getty Images
The full 5th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals is scheduled to hear arguments Wednesday in two cases that could determine whether public universities may bar drag shows from campus venues. Federal judges reached conflicting rulings in the disputes involving the Texas A&M University System. Keep Reading →
Meet the gay chef who built a world-renowned restaurant in a tiny Virginia town
Alan Diamond Sep 23, 2026 Chef Patrick O’Connell (left), The Inn at Little Washington, and his new memoir, Main, Middle & Gay
Courtesy The Inn at Little Washington
This story originally appeared on Out.Patrick O’Connell has spent nearly five decades turning a tiny Virginia town named Washington into the kind of place food lovers and travelers plan an entire trip around. In 1978, the self-taught chef opened The Inn at Little Washington in a former garage. Today, the Michelin-starred restaurant and Relais & Châteaux hotel is an internationally renowned destination, shaped as much by O’Connell’s highly personal vision of hospitality as by what arrives on the plate. Keep Reading →
Florida trans woman and her partner attacked while walking to work by women in a car
Jack Walker Sep 23, 2026 A Miami-Dade Sheriff's Office patrol car is parked in Miami Beach.
Jeffrey Greenberg/Universal Images Group via Getty Images
A Florida transgender woman and her partner were assaulted on a Miami street Sunday night while walking to work. Video footage shows the confrontation. Keep Reading →
Transgender radio DJ quits on air from Virginia station
Jacob Ogles Sep 22, 2026 Radio DJ Fievel Crane, previously host of the Morning Mix Tape on 106.1 FM in Charlottesville, announced their departure on the airwaves.
Instagram/@fievel42
A transgender radio DJ quit on air, alleging a hostile work environment at their Virginia radio station and claiming that they were censored from speaking on political issues. Keep Reading →
Neil Patrick Harris says his secret love of the WWE should have been a clue he was gay
Delia Curtis Sep 22, 2026
Getty Images/ Adobe Express
This story originally appeared on Them.Imagine this. Huge, beefy men are tumbling over each other, a mess of biceps, calves, and thighs, slick with sweat, bodies glistening, hair wet and plastered to their faces and necks. If you thought I was describing a heated gay sex scene, you’d be wrong. I’m actually referring to the ultimate queer-coded sport, WWE wrestling, which actor Neil Patrick Harris claims is a total tell for being gay. Keep Reading →
Most Popular
National
Nothing to see here? DHS Secretary Markwayne Mullin shares a D.C. home with a Republican congressman
The homeland security secretary, who owns dozens of properties, met Rep. Jason Smith during bipartisan congressional workouts more than a decade ago. Jacob Ogles Politics
Drag queen Alyssa Edwards responds to Ken Paxton's obsession with her: 'Texas is big enough for all of us'
The RuPaul’s Drag Race star has unexpectedly found herself at the center of a heated Texas Senate race. Mathew Rodriguez Obituaries
Cause of death revealed for gay adult star Christian Styles
The OnlyFans creator, 29, had a huge following after starting his career in the adult film industry in 2021. Ariel Messman-Rucker Politics
Sen. Tommy Tuberville calls trans people 'deranged' and rants about furry pilots in bizarre speech
Tuberville also suggested we need to “bring back mental institutions as a normal part of our society.” Mathew Rodriguez National
Judge questions Trump policy forcing HIV providers to disregard transgender patients
A Reagan-appointed judge pressed the administration over rules that providers say could upend their relationships with trans patients. Jack Walker Politics
Hasan Piker's 'meat pic' was on full display at the Republican National Convention
Republicans put the left-wing political commentator's thirsty selfie on the Jumbotron, and the internet has thoughts. Ariel Messman-Rucker CONTACT ABOUT US CAREER OPPORTUNITIES ADVERTISE WITH US PRIVACY POLICY PRIVACY PREFERENCES TERMS OF USE LEGAL NOTICE Advocate on Facebook Advocate on BlueSky Advocate on Threads Advocate on Instagram @ 2026 Equal Entertainment LLC. All Rights reserved