Macedonia Gay Rights Record 'Worst in Balkans' | Balkan Insight Back to BalkanInsight About Premium Subscription Newsletters Contact Follow us Search Countries Albania Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Greece Kosovo Moldova Montenegro North Macedonia Romania Serbia Turkey In Focus Balkan Transitional Justice Reporting Democracy Focus on Ukraine Focus on Gender Justice Balkan Migrant Route Balkan Media Watch Digital Rights Bulgaria-North Macedonia dispute Paper Trail: Investigations Russia in the Balkans Turkey and the Balkans Open Data and E-Governance China in the Balkans Focus on Far Right Environment Serbia-Kosovo Relations News Premium All Opinions Analysis Investigations Profiles Features Interviews Subscribe Newsletters Sign in News Macedonia Gay Rights Record ‘Worst in Balkans’ Sinisa Jakov Marusic Skopje February 16, 2012 10:29 Macedonia least respects the rights of the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transsexual community, of all the countries in the Balkans, an international watchdog says. March of Tollerance in Skopje | Photo by: Balkan Insight Macedonia’s gay rights record has been slated by an international LGBT rights group. An updated annual report, “Rainbow Europe Index 2011,” by the International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and Intersex Association, ILGA–Europe, puts Macedonia at the bottom of the Balkans when it comes to legal protection for the community. Macedonia scored only -2 on a scale from 17 to -7, with 17 as the highest score and -7 as the lowest, meaning a country characterised by “gross violations of human rights and discrimination” against the gay community. Macedonia is the only country from the Balkans placed in the so-called red zone of worst offenders, among 13 other states. “Nothing changed in the past year to improve [Macedonian] LGBT rights”, ILGA–Europe’s spokesperson, Juris Lavrikovs, told Balkan Insight. The index covers laws and administrative practices that protect or violate human rights, though it does not reflect the broader social situation that LGBT people might encounter in their societies. “Laws on hate and violence do not refer to sexual orientation or gender identity and do not recognise sexual orientation or gender identity as an aggravating factor,” ILGA complains about Macedonia, noting also that the country provides no legal recognition of same-sex partnerships. The rest of the Balkans is only slightly better and most countries fall into the so-called yellow zone of countries that are mediocre respecters of gay rights. Kosovo and Bosnia both score 1, while Serbia, Romania, Bulgaria, Greece, Albania and Montenegro score 2. The only Balkan countries listed in the better so-called green zone are Slovenia with 6 points and Croatia with 7. Of the rest of Europe, Ukraine comes right at the bottom, with -4 points, making it the worst violator of LGBT rights in the continent. The United Kingdom with 12.5 and Spain and Sweden with 12 points are on the top of the chart of 49 European countries. ILGA-Europe is an international non-governmental umbrella organisation bringing together 331 organisations advocating human rights and equality for LGBT people at the European level. Human Rights BIRN VIEW ALL POSTS Latest premium September 25, 2026 Review Week in Review: Spyware, AI and Arrests September 25, 2026 Video ARTE Europe Weekly: Datacentres and Hidden Cost of Digital Progress September 25, 2026 Review Democracy Digest: Czechia Restricts Rules for Russian Diplomats Travelling September 25, 2026 Feature Fading Away: Sicily’s Ancient Albanian Community Fears its Identity Risks Erasure September 25, 2026 Opinion Bringing the Balkans into Schengen: a Win-Win Scenario for Europe Subscribe to Premium Content Most popular September 24, 2026 Opinion Albania’s Cannabis Traffic is No Longer Only One-Way September 22, 2026 News Albania's Intelligence Chief Suspended for Allegedly Aiding Crime Group September 23, 2026 Investigation Netanyahu Lawyer Part of Operation to Build Israeli Drones in Serbia September 25, 2026 Review Week in Review: Spyware, AI and Arrests September 23, 2026 Opinion As Geopolitical Competition Intensifies, the EU’s Balkans Policy Must Adapt About About Us The Team Supporters and Partners Awards Subscription Premium Subscription Personal Subscription Institutional Subscription Student Subscription Terms & Policies General Terms of Use Personal Terms of Use Institutional Terms of Use Privacy Policy Cookie Policy Copyright Notice Republishing Policy Community Guidelines Editorial Standards Editorial Corrections & Complaints Letters to the Editor Engage Newsletters RSS Feeds Contact Services BIRN Consultancy Follow us Copyright BIRN 2026 | Powered by WordPress / WPML Published by BIRN Manage Consent To provide the best experiences, we and our partners use technologies like cookies to store and/or access device information. Consenting to these technologies will allow us and our partners to process personal data such as browsing behavior or unique IDs on this site and show (non-) personalized ads. Not consenting or withdrawing consent, may adversely affect certain features and functions. Click below to consent to the above or make granular choices. Your choices will be applied to this site only. You can change your settings at any time, including withdrawing your consent, by using the toggles on the Cookie Policy, or by clicking on the manage consent button at the bottom of the screen. Functional Functional Always active The technical storage or access is strictly necessary for the legitimate purpose of enabling the use of a specific service explicitly requested by the subscriber or user, or for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission of a communication over an electronic communications network. Preferences Preferences The technical storage or access is necessary for the legitimate purpose of storing preferences that are not requested by the subscriber or user. Statistics Statistics The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for statistical purposes. The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for anonymous statistical purposes. Without a subpoena, voluntary compliance on the part of your Internet Service Provider, or additional records from a third party, information stored or retrieved for this purpose alone cannot usually be used to identify you. Marketing Marketing The technical storage or access is required to create user profiles to send advertising, or to track the user on a website or across several websites for similar marketing purposes. Statistics Marketing Features Always active Always active Manage options Manage services Manage {vendor_count} vendors Read more about these purposes Accept Deny View preferences Save preferences View preferences {title} {title} {title} Manage consent