Indonesian Police Arrest 75 Members of LGBT Community in Puncak Villa - News En.tempo.co TEMPO EXCLUSIVE Tempo English Support Tempo LOGIN REGISTER Home Popular News News Asean & Beyond Sport Environment Sci & Tech Life & Style Outreach Interviews Photo Index Horizons & People Opinion Your View & Story World Home National Indonesian Police Arrest 75 Members of LGBT Community in Puncak Villa Reporter Vedro Imanuel Girsang June 26, 2025 | 06:53 pm Share Article link copied TEMPO.CO , Jakarta - The Indonesian Police detained dozens of individuals identified as members of an LGBT community on Sunday, June 22, at a villa in the Puncak area of Bogor Regency, West Java. According to West Java Regional Police PR Chief Comr. Hendra Rochmawan, the arrests occurred during a community gathering. "Seventy-five people were detained by Bogor Police during an event labeled as a Family Gathering," Hendra said on Tuesday, June 24. Hendra said that the LGBT community used the guise of a family gathering to avoid detection by authorities. Invitations for the event were distributed through social media. "They charged Rp200,000 per person," he said in a written statement. The operation was launched after authorities received a tip from local residents who suspected unusual activities linked to an LGBT community meeting. Police promptly responded, arriving at the scene shortly after receiving the report. When the police arrived, Hendra said, the event was still in full swing. "At the time of the raid, participants had just completed a series of entertainment activities," he stated. He added that a total of 75 individuals were present at the location during the operation, consisting of 74 men and a woman between the ages 21 and 50. They were all taken into custody for questioning. Authorities also seized several pieces of evidence from the scene, including four unused condoms and a sword used as a prop for a dance performance. The arrests were confirmed by Bogor Police's Criminal Investigation Unit Head, Adj. Comr. Teguh Kumara, who said his team directly intervened to break up the LGBT event. "A total of 75 individuals were detained," Teguh stated. Nabiila Azzahra contributed to this article Editor’s Choice: Prabowo to Hold Talks with Indonesian House on Iran-Israel Conflict Click here to get the latest news updates from Tempo on Google News LGBT Puncak Police West Java Recommended BI: Indonesia's Islamic Finance Assets Reach Rp3,131 Trillion 7 hours ago BGN Removes Free Meal Kitchen Head After 113 Fall Ill in Rembang 8 hours ago Losing Office in the Heat of Battle 15 hours ago Indonesia Suspends Five Cibinong Prison Officials After Ombudsman Finds Luxury Housing 15 hours ago Indonesian Forestry Group Backs Prabowo's Move to Revise Land-Burning Rules 21 hours ago Virgo Transport 8: Police Escort Recovered Victims' Bodies to Banjarmasin 21 hours ago Guruh Soekarnoputra, Son of Indonesia's First President, Dies at 73 21 hours ago Basarnas: Search Continues for 71 Missing Virgo Transport 8 Victims 1 days ago How Much Power Do Data Centers Consume in Indonesia? 1 days ago Who Dominates Indonesia's Creative Economy Workforce? 1 days ago Fact Check: Did an Indonesian Mother Kill Her LGBT Son? 19 Juli 2026 Fact Check: Did an Indonesian Mother Kill Her LGBT Son? Fact check - The murder was motivated by a deep-seated accumulation of frustration over the son's bad behavior. Read More Today's Top 3 News: Claims of 9-Day Global Blackout Starting July 18 18 Juli 2026 Today's Top 3 News: Claims of 9-Day Global Blackout Starting July 18 Here is the list of the top 3 news on Tempo English today. Read More Why Indonesia Sees Surge in Hate Crimes Against Trans Women 18 Juli 2026 Why Indonesia Sees Surge in Hate Crimes Against Trans Women The recent surge in persecution against the LGBT community, including trans women, is interlinked with the signing of an anti-LGBT Law. Read More Today's Top 3 News: Is the LGBT Community Causing Surge in HIV/AIDS? 17 Juli 2026 Today's Top 3 News: Is the LGBT Community Causing Surge in HIV/AIDS? Here is the list of the top 3 news on Tempo English today. Read More Fact Check: No, LGBT Community Is Not the Cause for HIV/AIDS Surge 16 Juli 2026 Fact Check: No, LGBT Community Is Not the Cause for HIV/AIDS Surge Fact check - Sexual orientation is not the cause of HIV/AIDS transmission. The heterosexual group contributes 70 percent of the cases. Read More The Flawed Logic of State Threats 15 Juli 2026 The Flawed Logic of State Threats The government classifies LGBTQ individuals as a non-military threat, accommodating the majority's prejudice. Read More Indonesia Denies State-Decreed LGBTQ Discrimination: What's the Truth? 10 Juli 2026 Indonesia Denies State-Decreed LGBTQ Discrimination: What's the Truth? Indonesia's anti-LGBTQ regulation sparked controversy. The government denies discriminating the minority group, but Amnesty doesn't buy it. Read More What Minister Yusril Says About the Proposed LGBT-Related Bill 10 Juli 2026 What Minister Yusril Says About the Proposed LGBT-Related Bill MUI's legal and legislative team is currently discussing the types of sanctions that will be included in the draft law on LGBT issues. Read More Indonesia Mulls Anti-LGBTQ Curriculum in Religious Education 7 Juli 2026 Indonesia Mulls Anti-LGBTQ Curriculum in Religious Education The Ministry of Religious Affairs plans to include anti-dissemination of LGBTQ culture in the religious education curriculum. Read More Lawmaker Backs Prabowo's LGBTQ Non-Military Threat Classification 7 Juli 2026 Lawmaker Backs Prabowo's LGBTQ Non-Military Threat Classification A Gerindra Party official said Prabowo has shown firmness as head of state in addressing what he described as the spread of LGBTQ culture. Read More Popular Pakistan: Suicide Attack at Police Stop Kills at Least 11 20 hours ago Iran Awaits Final US Response on Seven-Day Plan to Reopen Strait of Hormuz 17 hours ago Rahmat Erwin Wins Asian Games Gold in Men's 75kg Weightlifting 13 hours ago Iran Threatens More Powerful Strikes if US, Israel Attack Tehran Again 6 hours ago Massive Attack's Robert Del Naja Arrested at Pro-Palestine Protest 6 hours ago BGN Removes Free Meal Kitchen Head After 113 Fall Ill in Rembang 8 hours ago Indonesian Forestry Group Backs Prabowo's Move to Revise Land-Burning Rules 21 hours ago China, US Agree to Set Up Channel for AI Safety Incidents 19 hours ago Thailand, Vietnam Secure Opening Wins in 2026 FIFA ASEAN Cup Group B 20 hours ago Trump Rejects Iran Proposal to Reopen Strait of Hormuz 19 hours ago More Popular Latest Massive Attack's Robert Del Naja Arrested at Pro-Palestine Protest 6 hours ago Iran Threatens More Powerful Strikes if US, Israel Attack Tehran Again 6 hours ago 4 New 'Avengers: Endgame' Scenes Set Up 'Doomsday' 6 hours ago Pope Decries 'Scourge' of Sexual Abuse During France Visit 7 hours ago BI: Indonesia's Islamic Finance Assets Reach Rp3,131 Trillion 7 hours ago BGN Removes Free Meal Kitchen Head After 113 Fall Ill in Rembang 8 hours ago UK Reports 'Major Incident,' Arrests Near Fairford Air Base 8 hours ago Indonesia Advances to Pokemon Unite Final at 2026 Asian Games 10 hours ago Today's Top 3 News: Forestry Group Backs Prabowo's Move to Revise Land-Burning Rules 10 hours ago Indonesia Announces Bid for UN Security Council Seat in 2029-2030 11 hours ago More Popular Information About Us Cyber Media Guidelines Terms of Service Advertise Tempo Privacy Policy Trustworthy News Media Network TEMPO.CO Koran Tempo Majalah Tempo Tempo English Magazine TEMPO.CO English Tempo Institute Tempo Data Science Indonesiana Teras Ziliun Telusuri Cantika Tempo Store Orbitin Ruang dan Tempo TV Tempo GoOto Kok Bisa Temotion Tempo Spot Baca Social Media LINE Download Tempo App [x] close