Skip to Main Content Accessibility Help Menu CBC Gem CBC Listen Search Search Sign In Quick Links News Sports Radio Music Listen Live TV Watch news Top Stories Local Climate World Canada Politics Indigenous Business The National Health Entertainment Science CBC News Investigates Disability Life Go Public About CBC News Being Black in Canada More 'Your call for action turned on you,' says judge in rejecting appeal of convicted pastor | CBC News Loaded Calgary 'Your call for action turned on you,' says judge in rejecting appeal of convicted pastor Calgary pastor Derek Reimer used a “dangerous and clumsy tool” when he incited his followers to harass a librarian ahead of a drag storytime reading event, a judge ruled in rejecting both the protestor’s conviction and sentence appeal. Derek Reimer was convicted of criminal harassment and 4 breaches of his bail conditions last year Meghan Grant · CBC News · Posted: May 21, 2025 4:07 PM EDT | Last Updated: May 21, 2025 Listen to this article Estimated 4 minutes The audio version of this article is generated by AI-based technology. Mispronunciations can occur. We are working with our partners to continually review and improve the results. Derek Reimer's appeal of his harassment and breach convictions was rejected on Wednesday. He is pictured here attending court earlier this month. (Derek Reimer/Facebook ) Social Sharing Calgary pastor Derek Reimer used a "dangerous and clumsy tool" when he incited his followers to harass a librarian ahead of a drag storytime reading event, a judge ruled in rejecting both the protester's conviction and sentence appeal. On Wednesday, Court of King's Bench Justice Shane Parker upheld Reimer's convictions for criminal harassment and bail breaches as well as his one-year conditional sentence order, which includes 24-hour house arrest followed by three years probation. In arguing his sentence appeal, Reimer wanted a reduced sentence, claiming he and his wife had been harassed in the wake of the media attention following his arrests and trials.  Parker rejected the suggestion that should be given any weight when considering sentence. 'Invite the mob to act, you lose control' The judge pointed out that Reimer was the one who decided to "invite the public in," intending for them to "turn on the librarian." "The lesson here is once you invite the mob to act you lose control," said Parker.  "Your call for action turned on you … this is why inciting the public to intimidate and harass is a dangerous and clumsy tool; once unleashed, you lose control." Derek Reimer is escorted away from an all-ages drag brunch at the Rec Room in January 2023. He was later arrested and charged with hate-motivated crimes after disrupting storytime events in February and March 2023. (Brangwyn Jones) Reimer faced several sets of charges after he was arrested three times in five weeks in the spring of 2023, protesting Reading With Royalty events hosted at Calgary Public Library branches across the city.  The events involved drag queens reading stories to children. The harassment  Reimer and his supporters have called the drag queens "perverts" and described the events as "pervert grooming sessions." In December, Justice Karen Molle sentenced Reimer for harassing the Saddletown librarian on March 27, 2023, when he attended the library ahead of a Reading With Royalty event. Strapped with a GoPro camera, Reimer confronted the manager about the event and recorded the interaction, accusing her of "corrupting kids" and told her if she followed through on the planned reading event, he would return.  He told her "we're going to make this public and your name's going to be out there.… I don't think you want that kind of attention." Reimer then posted the video to his followers on Facebook, included the woman's name, title, a phone number and gave details of the time and location of the library event. He encouraged followers to contact the woman and to "take action."  'His conduct was dangerous' The woman reported receiving a message that read "shame on you." In her testimony, the woman said the post caused her anxiety. She said she warned colleagues and locked down her social media accounts.  In his appeal, defence lawyer Andrew MacKenzie argued that Reimer's conduct was not serious enough to cause fear in a reasonable person.  Parker rejected this argument, finding that Reimer labelled the woman as a child abuser and provided her contact information, "citing the mob to take it from there." "His conduct was dangerous and would cause anyone to fear for their safety," said Parker. "This label has led to beatings and death." Calgary pastor known for library drag protests is back in jail after courthouse rally Reimer's conditional sentence order means he is permitted to serve his sentence at home. However, he was arrested on May 8 after showing up at court 90 minutes early to participate in a protest on the courthouse steps.  Although he is allowed to attend court while on house arrest, the allegation is that he exploited the exemption by attending much earlier than required for the purpose of protesting.  Last week, Reimer was denied bail following his arrest. He is back in court on Thursday for a hearing on a charge of breaching his conditional sentence order. In September 2024, a judge acquitted Reimer on charges of mischief and causing a disturbance connected to an incident at the Seton Library in February 2023.  The Crown has appealed those acquittals.  Last October, Reimer was found guilty of breach charges stemming from his protests. For those convictions, he was fined $500. ABOUT THE AUTHOR Meghan Grant CBC Calgary crime reporter Meghan Grant is a justice affairs reporter. She has been covering courts, crime and stories of police accountability in southern Alberta for more than a decade. Send Meghan a story tip at meghan.grant@cbc.ca. CBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices · About CBC News Corrections and clarifications · Submit a news tip · Report error Related Stories Top stories from CBC Calgary Landlord testifies 37,000 lb. of trash removed from property rented by alleged serial rapist Both Coutts blockade leaders denied parole over 'lack of accountability' Crown seeks 8 years in prison for couple whose son died after scalding Footer Links My Account Profile CBC Gem Newsletters About CBC Accounts Connect with CBC Facebook X YouTube Instagram Mobile RSS Podcasts Contact CBC Submit Feedback Help Centre Audience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON Canada, M5W 1E6 Toll-free (Canada only): 1-866-306-4636 About CBC Corporate Info Sitemap Reuse & Permission Terms of Use Privacy Notice Privacy Preferences Jobs Our Unions Independent Producers Political Ads Registry AdChoices Services Ombudsman Corrections and Clarifications Public Appearances Commercial Services CBC Shop Doing Business with Us Renting Facilities Radio Canada International CBC Lite Accessibility It is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges. Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem . About CBC Accessibility Accessibility Feedback © 2026 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved. Visitez Radio-Canada.ca