Singapore | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Singapore At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Legal Gender Recognition Possible? Yes LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? No Last Update: March 12, 2026 In 2022, Singapore decriminalized consensual same-sex relations between men by repealing Section 377A of the Penal Code 1871. This repeal took effect in January 2023. However, the government simultaneously amended the constitution to codify the definition of marriage as a union between a man and a woman, effectively barring the legal recognition of same-sex marriages. Same-sex couples also face other challenges in forming families, including restrictions on adoption rights. Transgender individuals in Singapore can legally change their gender markers on the condition of undergoing gender-affirming surgery. In 1996, Parliament passed a law clarifying that individuals who had undergone gender-affirming surgery would be allowed to marry someone of a different sex. Trans youth can access gender-affirming hormone therapy with both parents’ consent, provided they are over 16 through private health care or over 18 through public health care. However, access to hormone therapy for trans youth under 21 is subject to much stricter scrutiny , particularly in light of the global discourse surrounding medical transitioning for trans youth. They face more extensive evaluation than trans adults, and in some cases, individuals have been denied access to gender-affirming hormone therapy despite having consent from both parents. While there are protections against incitement to violence , comprehensive antidiscrimination laws specifically safeguarding sexual and gender minorities are not in place. In 2018, Education Minister Ong Ye Kung stated that discrimination in employment, housing, and education would not be tolerated . However, LGBTIQ topics are censored in the media and education by the Ministry of Digital Development and Information. LGBTIQ activists in Singapore also face gendered threats online and government surveillance due to their activism, leading to specific mental health stressors . In 2021, the Singapore Psychological Society condemned “conversion therapy” and endorsed affirmative treatment for people of queer experience. LGBTIQ community organizing is thriving in Singapore, with Pink Dot as the main public Pride event promoting LGBTIQ inclusion. Other active groups include Pelangi Pride Cent re, which acts as a resource center and queer library, and Oogachaga , which focuses on providing counseling to sexual and gender minorities. Organizing in Singapore operates within a sometimes restrictive environment where advocacy focuses on incremental change, fostering community resilience, and increasing public awareness. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International