Cambodia | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Cambodia At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? No Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? No Legal Gender Recognition Possible? No LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? No Last Update: March 12, 2026 Since it became a French protectorate in 1867 and following its full independence in 1953, Cambodia has never criminalized same-sex sexual activity between adults. However, Article 45 of the constitution defines marriage as the union between one husband and one wife. During its third Universal Periodic Review (UPR) in June 2019, Cambodia accepted recommendations to legalize same-sex marriage. In its fourth UPR in 2024, Cambodia accepted all 12 recommendations on LGBTIQ people’s rights, including seven recommendations to make progress toward marriage equality. In the absence of legal provisions recognizing same-sex marriage , some couples have had unofficial traditional wedding ceremonies and parties. In 2018, authorities interrupted and prohibited a wedding ceremony between two men in the Kratie province. The country’s legislation does not contain any provision prohibiting discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, or sex characteristics. Sexual and gender minorities still face discrimination and family rejection. LGBTIQ organizations and activists are able to obtain legal status and operate freely in the country. Cambodian government officials have participated in dialogues with LGBTIQ civil society to discuss further advancing the rights of people of queer experience. In February 2026, the President of the Cambodian Human Rights Committee endorsed the formal recognition of same-sex marriage. In 2025, he also remarked on the importance of protecting human rights in correctional facilities, especially for transgender people . In the same year, the Department of Media and Communication urged media institutions to establish internal gender sensitive policies to ensure the safety of women and LGBTQ+ journalists. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International