World’s Largest Religious Gathering Becomes Trans-Inclusive | Inter Press Service Languages ESPAÑOL FRANÇAIS DEUTSCH ITALIANO JAPANESE NEDERLANDS PORTUGUÊS SUOMI SVENSKA SWAHILI TÜRKÇE Sunday, September 27, 2026 INTER PRESS SERVICE News Agency News and Views from the Global South Africa Asia-Pacific Europe Latin America & the Caribbean Middle East & North Africa North America Global Home Development & Aid Aid Education Energy Health Food & Agriculture Humanitarian Emergencies Poverty & SDGs Population Economy & Trade Financial Crisis Green Economy Labour Natural Resources Trade & Investment Cooperatives Environment Advancing Deserts Biodiversity Climate Change Green Economy Water & Sanitation Human Rights Armed Conflicts Crime & Justice Democracy Indigenous Rights LGBTQ Migration & Refugees Press Freedom Religion Global Governance Civilisations Find Alliances Eye on the IFIs Global Geopolitics Globalisation Peace South-South United Nations South-South G77 Regional Alliances Southern Aid & Trade Civil Society Active Citizens World Social Forum Conferences Gender Gender Violence Women & Economy Women & Climate Change Women’s Health Gender Identity Women in Politics Arts , Asia-Pacific , Civil Society , Editors' Choice , Featured , Gender , Gender Identity , Headlines , Human Rights , LGBTQ , Religion , TerraViva United Nations Religion World’s Largest Religious Gathering Becomes Trans-Inclusive Despite Controversies By Stella Paul Reprint | | Print | Pavitra Nandagiri—one of the highest-ranking transgender spiritual leaders at Maha Kumbh, the largest religious gathering on earth in Prayagraj, India. Credit: Stella Paul/IPS PRAYAGRAJ, India, Feb 18 2025 (IPS) - Despite a blazing sun and growing heat, Pavitra Nandagiri sits on a cot smiling. Clad in a saffron robe and headgear with her forehead painted with turmeric and vermillion, Nandagiri is a Mahamandaleshwar—one of the highest-ranking monks of the Kinnar Akhada (Transgender Arena) at the Maha Kumbh, the world’s largest religious gathering currently underway in northern India. As a steady stream of visitors pours in to touch her feet, Nandagiri raises her right hand and touches their heads in a gesture of accepting their respect and blesses them. Just a few hours ago, she had taken part in the special, ceremonial snan (bathing) in the Sangam—a place with mythological significance where three holy rivers—Ganga, Jamuna and Saraswati—are believed to have met. Taking a dip in the confluence of these rivers is considered by Hindus as the most sacred act of one’s lifetime. The ceremonial bathing is led by the most important of the living Hindu saints and godmen who follow a strict order of hierarchy. On Wednesday morning (February 12), the fourth ceremonial bathing of the 45-day Maha Kumbh was held. Fifteen transgender spiritual leaders, including Nandagiri, marched along with the Naga Sadhus and Aghoris—the legendary saints with ash-covered bodies, matted hair, and minimalistic clothing. Together, they bathed in the river with the holy chant of “Har har Mahadev” (Hail Shiva) while saints of other sects waited for their turn. A devotee prays at the Maha Kumbh Sangam, where three rivers are believed to have converged. While two of the rivers—Ganges and Yamuna—are visible, the third river, Saraswati, is said to be hidden underneath. Credit: Stella Paul/IPS Later, inside the Kinnar Akhada, trans gurus receive visitors while some are seen performing some rituals and meditating along with Aghori ascetics. Asked how the partnership between the third highest order of the religious saints and the trans leaders came to be, Nandagiri says that it had been in the making since 2015 and culminated in a functioning collaboration during this year’s Maha Kumbh, which happens once every 12 years. She, however, does not share other details except that perhaps what brought together the two sects is their shared denouncement of worldly pleasure and embracing of a life free from its wealth and other complexities. Transgender-Inclusive Kumbh: Conditions Apply At the Kumbh, Akharas are organized into various sects, primarily categorized based on their philosophical orientation and the deity they worship. The two main sects are Shaiva Akharas, dedicated to Lord Shiva, and Vaishnava Akharas, devoted to Lord Vishnu. Each Akhara operates under a hierarchical structure, typically led by a Mahant (chief) or Acharya (spiritual leader) who oversees the spiritual and administrative functions. The inclusion of the transgender Acharyas in the Kumbh, especially as a part of the highly revered Juna Akhada of the group of the Naga Sadhus, however, has not been completely free of controversies. Some have disputed their claim of embracing a minimalistic life and accused them of indulging in a game of power and authority considered unbefitting for true sainthood. On January 24, the community ushered in a former film actress called Mamta Kulkarni as one of its top leaders, which led to protests by many both from within the trans community and leaders of other Hindu sects, who described it as a public relations stunt. Baba Ramdev—a well-known yoga guru—called it a violation of the Hindu religious ethos. Some gurus went as far as threatening to boycott the next Kumbh—to be held in 2037—if the Kinnar Akhada is not excluded from the ritual bathing. Kalyani Nandagiri—another top-ranking trans guru who opposed the actress’s inclusion—was physically attacked by unidentified assailants on February 12. A monk at the Transgender Arena within the Maha Kumbh. Credit: Stella Paul/IPS Despite these deep divisions and acts of violence, Pavitra Nanndgiri remains hopeful of the community’s future. “People say a lot of things; some wrongs also happen. But such small issues should not be highlighted much. We are here today, and we will be here then (in the next Kumbh),” she says, sounding more like a peace advocate. A Different Picture While inside the Kinnar Akhada, trans gurus are busy receiving and blessing visitors; outside, on the street, a small crowd of men is seen surrounding a young trans man dancing to the fast beats of music. “This is Launda Naach,” says Ajeet Bahadur—a local theater artist. “It’s a common form of rural entertainment here, performed typically by cross-dressing trans men.” The audience of Launda Naach is typically male. It is said to have started at a time when women were not allowed to dance in public because of orthodox social norms. However, today the moves of a Launda Naach performer are often sleazy and according to Ajeet Bahadur, the dancers are often sexually exploited, and their performance is rarely seen as art. “Their lives are unbelievably miserable; there is little respect for their art, all eyes are on their bodies and exploitation and poverty are a constant part of their lives,” says Bahadur, who has studied the lives of Launda Naach performers for some time. Aside from Launda Naach performers, thousands of other trans men and women in India struggle to earn a living. They are usually seen begging on the street and inside public transport, while many are also often accused of extorting money from small businesses such as shopkeepers in local markets. Not surprisingly, the presence of a trans person in India usually evokes a mix of fear and contempt instead of the deep respect that is on display in the Kinnar Akhada of the Kumbh. Will the elevated status of the gurus here lead to any change in the social status of the common trans people? Priyanka Nandagiri, a transgender monk, says that it cannot be guaranteed. “Broadly, the transgender community in India is divided into two groups: the Sanatani and the Deredaar. We are the members of the Sanatani group who have always been immersed in religious activities, while the Deredaar are the ones who have chosen a different lifestyle, such as performing dances on the street and at social events like weddings, etc. So, we have always been following separate paths,” she explains. Dwita Acharya and Mohini Acharya—two other trans monks—nod in agreement: “It will depend on what life they choose,” they say in unison. ”If they want to follow our path (the Sanatani), they will get that recognition but if they want to continue with their usual Deredaar lifestyle, then people will continue to view them accordingly.” IPS UN Bureau Report Follow @IPSNewsUNBureau Tweet Follow @stellasglobe Republish | | Print | Related Tags India IPS UN Bureau IPS UN Bureau Report Editors' choice Forty Years of the ‘Right to Development’: When Growth Excludes, Is It Still Development? Busani Bafana | Africa A New Arms Race is Threatening to Take-off—this time in Outer Space Thalif Deen | Global Floods, Hunger and Disease Pile on Myanmar’s Civil War Misery Guy Dinmore, and a reporter in Yangon | Asia-Pacific Pictures for this story This story includes downloadable print-quality images -- Copyright IPS, to be used exclusively with this story. Pavitra Nandagiri—one of the highest-ranking transgender spiritual leaders at Maha Kumbh, the largest religious gathering on earth in Prayagraj, India. Credit: Stella Paul/IPS A devotee prays at the Maha Kumbh Sangam, where three rivers are believed to have converged. While two of the rivers—Ganges and Yamuna—are visible, the third river, Saraswati, is said to be hidden underneath. Credit: Stella Paul/IPS A monk at the Transgender Arena within the Maha Kumbh. Credit: Stella Paul/IPS ADVERTISEMENT ADVERTISEMENT Most popular Sudan: Blood on Foreign Powers’ Hands IRAQ: ‘Art Is the Only Weapon That Doesn’t Hurt or Kill’ Myanmar: Corporate Complicity in the Spotlight Norway’s Development Rethink Should See Ocean Investment as a Strategic Interest US Visas for Ruthless Autocrats to Address UN – but not for Palestinian Leaders What Isn’t Named Isn’t Protected and being Named Isn’t Enough United Nations Least Developed Country Category – Curse or Boon? AI-Driven Climate Change Pushes Frontline Communities Further Into Environmental Degradation and Poverty Nature and the Environment: How Can the UN Improve Its Work on the Environment? Life-Changing Humanitarians Empower Women Against Violence in Papua New Guinea’s Highlands Recent Posts Nepal’s Devastating Floods Have Put Women and Girls at Greater Risk Myanmar: Corporate Complicity in the Spotlight Forty Years of the ‘Right to Development’: When Growth Excludes, Is It Still Development? From Commitments to Action: Centering Lived Experience in NCD Responses AI-Driven Climate Change Pushes Frontline Communities Further Into Environmental Degradation and Poverty Norway’s Development Rethink Should See Ocean Investment as a Strategic Interest From Vienna to New York: Nuclear Governance Faces New Tests Ahead of First TPNW Review Conference The BBNJ Agreement: From Paper to Protection – The Real Test for Global Ocean Governance When African Smallholders Access Finance, They’ll Show You What’s Possible The Overlooked Fast Track for Cutting Planetary Warming The Week with IPS ADVERTISEMENT ADVERTISEMENT Africa Asia-Pacific Europe Latin America & the Caribbean Middle East & North Africa North America Global Newsletter RSS Subscribe Reprint / Republish Contact Us Our Partners Donate About Us Our Team Follow IPS Twitter Facebook IPS is an international communication institution with a global news agency at its core,raising the voices of the South and civil society on issues of development, globalisation, human rights and the environment Copyright © 2026 IPS-Inter Press Service. All rights reserved. - Terms & Conditions X You have the Power to Make a Difference Would you consider a $20.00 contribution today that will help to keep the IPS news wire active? Your contribution will make a huge difference. Make a Difference