Abuja Area Mama, Nigerian transgender TikToker, found dead Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Home News US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business World of Business Technology of Business NYSE Opening Bell Technology Artificial Intelligence Intelligence Revolution AI v the Mind Tech Now Health Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList To the Ends of the Earth Earth Science Natural Wonders Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcast Categories Radio Audio FAQs Video BBC Maestro Discover the World Live Live News Live Sport Site search Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters Nigerian transgender TikToker found dead 9 August 2024 Share Save Add as preferred on Google Wycliffe Muia BBC News Abuja Area Mama/Instagram Last year, Abuja Area Mama had expressed fears for her life Nigerian police are investigating the death of a Nigerian transgender TikToker known as “Abuja Area Mama”. The beaten and bruised body of 33-year-old transgender woman was found along a highway in the capital, Abuja, on Thursday, local media report. Abuja Area Mama had a loyal fan base on social media, where she posted about being transgender and her life as a sex worker. She never used her full name, referring to herself sometimes as Ifeanyi. Nigeria is a deeply conservative society and people who step outside the norms are often targeted. Last year the TikToker told of how she had been attacked and feared for her life. Same-sex relationships are criminalised in Africa’s most-populous nation and many LGBTQ+ Nigerians live in fear. Nigerian TikTokers who are perceived to be gay have also become the target of homophobic abuse online. In her last post on Instagram on Wednesday , Abuja Area Mama had said she was getting ready to go and see her boyfriend. Hours later, her body was found along Katampe - Mabushi expressway in the Banex, Wuse II area of Abuja, in what is suspected to be a murder incident. A team of detectives visited the scene on Thursday morning and “preliminary investigations revealed that the individual was a man fully dressed in female clothing with no means of identification on him”, a police statement said. Abuja police chief Benneth Igweh has since ordered a "thorough and discreet” investigation into the death. Last September, the TikToker said she had been stabbed by an unidentified person in what were unclear circumstances. On her TikTok profile, she described herself as “the number one Abuja cross-dresser and queen of the street”. She said her posts were intended to be a reflection of her life and educate her followers. The news of her death has sparked an outpouring of grief on social media. Even though Nigeria's laws guarantee freedom from discrimination and the right to private and family life, mass arrests and detention of those in the LGBTQ+ community are common - especially in northern states. "Taking laws into your hand because you don't like another person's sexual orientation is the worst form of inhumanity," local journalist Martins Ifijeh said. You may also be interested in: Nigeria-EU deal sparks false claims over LGBT rights The Nigerian queer parties that offer liberation Lured into a trap and blackmailed for being gay The Nigerians worried about a bill to outlaw cross-dressing Getty Images/BBC Go to BBCAfrica.com for more news from the African continent. Follow us on Twitter @BBCAfrica , on Facebook at BBC Africa or on Instagram at bbcafrica BBC Africa podcasts Africa Daily Focus on Africa Nigeria LGBT rights in Africa Africa Related Africa's richest man helps fund $660m fuel pipeline between Ethiopia and Djibouti Spotlight on new coaches as road to Afcon 2027 begins Nigerian football enduring 'worst time in history' - Odegbami More from the BBC 7 hrs ago Two mass shootings in South Africa leave 27 dead The two attacks hours apart come as the country struggles to stop high levels of gang-related armed violence. 7 hrs ago 2 days ago Are Ethiopians marching back to war in Tigray? Exploring the issues behind the escalation of tensions between the TPLF and the national army. 2 days ago 3 days ago Ethiopia's army says it has repelled attacks in first comment on fresh fighting The military says its soldiers inflicted casualties as fears grow of a resumption of a full-blown civil war. 3 days ago 3 days ago Man killed by insurgents gave up helicopter place Mawer had worked for construction firm RA International in the African country for 18 months. 3 days ago 3 days ago South Sudan's president dissolves government ahead of country's first elections South Sudan has not held elections since independence in 2011 - polls have twice been postponed. 3 days ago British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages The BBC is in multiple languages Read the BBC In your own language BBC News Brasil BBC News Mundo (Spanish) BBC News မြန်မာ (Burmese) BBC News 中文 (Chinese) BBC News Indonesia BBC News 코리아 (Korean) BBC News ไทย (Thai) BBC News Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese) BBC News Azərbaycanca (Azeri) BBC News Magyarul (Hungarian) BBC News Кыргыз Кызматы (Kyrgyz) BBC News Polska (Polish) BBC News România (Romanian) BBC News Русская служба (Russian) BBC News na srpskom (Serbian) BBC News Україна (Ukrainian) BBC News O'zbek (Uzbek) BBC News عربي (Arabic) BBC News فارسی (Persian) BBC News Türkçe (Turkish) BBC News বাংলা (Bengali) BBC News دری (Dari) BBC News ગુજરાતી (Gujarati) BBC News हिन्दी (Hindi) BBC News मराठी (Marathi) BBC News नेपाली (Nepali) BBC News සිංහල (Sinhala) BBC News ਪੰਜਾਬੀ (Punjabi) BBC News Afaan Oromoo BBC News አማርኛ (Amharic) BBC News Afrique (French) BBC News Hausa BBC News Gaelic NAIDHEACHDAN BBC News Ìgbò BBC News Japanese 日本語 BBC News Gahuza BBC News Pidgin BBC News Somali BBC News Swahili BBC News தமிழ் (Tamil) BBC News తెలుగు (Telugu) BBC News ትግርኛ (Tigrinya) BBC News اردو (Urdu) BBC News Yorùbá BBC News World Service Follow BBC on: Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Do not share or sell my info Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us BBC.com Help & FAQs Content Index Set Preferred Source Copyright 2026 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.