Skip to content
Facebook
Twitter
Instagram
Donate
English
polski
русский
SIP main page
Search for:
Association for Legal Intervention
Stowarzyszenie Interwencji Prawnej działa na rzecz osób dyskryminowanych lub zagrożonych wykluczeniem społecznym udzielając im pomocy prawnej i wsparcia integracyjnego.
Need help?
Polish-Belarusian border
Support for refugees from Ukraine
Primary Menu
Who we are
About us
Our team
Annual reports
Projects
Current projects
Past projects
Standards of actions
Contact
Our work
News
Advice and support
Publications
Key cases
Our impact
Impact 2022
Impact 2023
Refugee Council
Intercultural dialogue
Advocacy
Issues
Refugees
Migration
Returns
Detention
What is detention?
Alternatives to detention
Hostages of the System: stories from detention
Children and youth
Integration
Racism and discrimination
Labour market
For business
Corporate Social Responsibility
Paid services
Employment of migrant workers
Trainings & workshops for entrepreneurs
Anti-discrimination and anti-mobbing policy
Audit of HR policy and procedures
Our prices for the employers
Contact for employers
Get involved
Donate
Volunteering
Corporate volunteering
Lawyers pro bono
Contact
Home Issues Detention Transgender woman released from a guarded center for male foreigners
Categories Detention News
Transgender woman released from a guarded center for male foreigners
13 March 2024 28 March 2024
A Polish regional court placed a transgender citizen of Vietnam who identified as a woman in a guarded center for male foreigners. Ever since she was apprehended, she continued telling employees of the center, including social workers, that she was a transgender person, that she had been undergoing hormone therapy since 2018, and that if she were to stop taking her medicines, it would be detrimental to her health. This did not convince the Border Guard to release her from the guarded center or to move her to a center which was not exclusively for males.
According to Polish law, if a person’s stay at a guarded center for foreigners might pose a threat to their life or health or if a person’s mental or physical condition suggests that they have suffered from violence, such a person is not to be placed in a guarded center. Immediately after extending our support to the foreigner in question we submitted an application to the Commander of the relevant Border Guard Post who was in charge of the guarded center, asking them to release the woman from the center because, as per the law, court rulings, and international standards, a transgender woman should not be kept in a guarded center for males. We pointed out that the foreigner in question had been undergoing hormone therapy for years. At the center, she was deprived of her medicines and the Border Guard refused to allow those to be supplied to her by support organisations. As a result of this, the hormone therapy of the foreigner in question was interrupted for three months and this had a negative impact on her health. We also demonstrated that she has suffered from violence and a sexual assault in the past. Consequently, she should not be kept in a guarded center at all and her stay there is immensely difficult and stressful for her.
Reacting to our application for her release from the center, the Border Guard Commander decided to release her in view of the fact that her continued stay at the center could pose a threat to her life or health (Article 406(1)(2) in conjunction with Article 400(1) of the Act on Foreigners). The head of the center’s medical personnel concluded that „there are health-related contraindications for prolonged stay at the center” and the Commander, having taken this piece of information, an interview with the foreigner, her medical examination, her psychological diagnosis, and her medical documentation into account, concluded that „continued stay at the guarded center for foreigners in K. is not advised.”
The foreigner in question has been set free and is able to make use of medical procedures and continue her hormone therapy.
The woman is supported by Magdalena Fuchs, trainee attorney-at-law, and Elena Efimova, integration advisor.
Share
Related articles
19 February 2026
SIP joins the case challenging the refusal to accept an asylum application
19 June 2023
Supreme Court: Compensation for detention independent of migrant’s culpability
8 April 2025
Ugandan Writer Granted Refugee Status
Post navigation
Previous Previous post: We have an impact! A summary of key SIP activities in 2023 Next Next post: We comment on the proposed amendments to the Act on Foreigners
Issues Refugees
Migration
Returns
Detention
Children and youth
Integration
Racism and discrimination
Labour market
Last articles
Provincial Administrative Court: The Border Guard register cannot be the sole basis for refusing the 800+ benefit
9 September 2026
The need for continued medical treatment as a basis for granting subsidiary protection.
8 September 2026
21,000 PLN in compensation for unfair detention and violence
30 July 2026
Amendment to the Act on Foreigners: We Have Submitted Our Comments and Recommendations to the Ministry of the Interior and Administration
24 July 2026
Refugee Board: The situation in Afghanistan still justifies granting international protection
21 July 2026
Facebook
Twitter
Instagram
Copyright © Stowarzyszenie Interwencji Prawnej 2020 | Made by Desta Design
This website uses cookies to improve your experience while you navigate through the website. Read more accept Privacy & Cookies Policy
Close
Privacy Overview
This website uses cookies to improve your experience while you navigate through the website. Out of these cookies, the cookies that are categorized as necessary are stored on your browser as they are essential for the working of basic functionalities of the website. We also use third-party cookies that help us analyze and understand how you use this website. These cookies will be stored in your browser only with your consent. You also have the option to opt-out of these cookies. But opting out of some of these cookies may have an effect on your browsing experience.
Necessary
Necessary
Always Enabled
Necessary cookies are absolutely essential for the website to function properly. This category only includes cookies that ensures basic functionalities and security features of the website. These cookies do not store any personal information.
Non-necessary
Non-necessary
Any cookies that may not be particularly necessary for the website to function and is used specifically to collect user personal data via analytics, ads, other embedded contents are termed as non-necessary cookies. It is mandatory to procure user consent prior to running these cookies on your website.
SAVE & ACCEPT
Skip to content
Open toolbar
Accessibility Tools
Increase Text
Decrease Text
Grayscale
High Contrast
Negative Contrast
Light Background
Links Underline
Readable Font
Reset