Comoros court convicts lesbian couple, sentences them to months in jail Politics Local National World Arts & Entertainment Financial Photos Opinions Life Style Noticias en Español Classifieds About Archives Print Edition Find a Copy Subscribe Contact Us Los Angeles Blade Advertise with Us Become A Blade Member Connect with us Washington Blade: LGBTQ News, Politics, LGBTQ Rights, Gay News Comoros court convicts lesbian couple, sentences them to months in jail FUND LGBTQ JOURNALISM Donate Politics Trump-appointed judge restores White House TV pool access White House press pool pushes back after Trump bars three outlets Jeremy Moss looks to bring LGBTQ advocacy from Lansing to Capitol Hill LGBTQ issues, attacks on Democrats dominate unusual RNC midterm convention Ind. prosecutor declines to press charges over false Buttigieg child welfare complaint Local Comings & Goings Former Capital Pride board member reiterates sexual harassment allegation Center for Black Equity’s annual gala to take place Oct. 3 Charles Bowers, former owner of Baltimore gay bar the Hippo, dies Being a female firefighter comes with unique risks, and rewards D.C. Maryland Virginia Delaware Best of Gay DC Photos National Grace Meng sharply criticizes DOJ over hospital settlements Philadelphia event to launch 2026 LGBT History Month Dutch prime minister visits Stonewall Inn For lesbian victims of domestic violence, competent care is scare Long-time DignityUSA executive director announces retirement World Colombia withdraws from Equal Rights Coalition Caso Karlina: Una sentencia histórica contra las terapias de «conversión» Dutch prime minister visits Stonewall Inn Spike in HIV cases prompts Fiji to declare national emergency UN human rights chief sounds alarm over ‘comprehensive onslaught’ against LGBTQ rights Noticias en Español Caso Karlina: Una sentencia histórica contra las terapias de «conversión» Mujer trans salvadoreña es encontrada sin vida Realidad LGBTQ en Honduras: fuga o muerte Un terremoto también se vive desde el exilio Centenares de personas participan en la Marcha del Orgullo en la capital salvadoreña Opinions Washington Blade responds to concerns over White House pool duties Young people should know history of the fight for human rights How emerging drone tech can support LGBTQ workplace inclusion What LGBTQ veterans are building after ‘Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell’ Gun reform is an LGBTQ rights issue Peter Rosenstein Kate Clinton Rick Rosendall Kathi Wolfe Brock Thompson Mark Lee A&E PHOTOS: HRC National Dinner What’s frightening is also funny in ‘Venus’ ‘Lizzie Borden’ might be the best ‘Monster’ yet Tyler Clementi Foundation to host fundraiser in Rehoboth Calendar: September 25-October 1 Television All the queer things to watch this fall ‘Vampire Lestat’ heats up Pride month with queer action Repression, toxic masculinity fuel intense queer drama ‘Half Man’ Spring’s best in queer TV and film Netflix’s ‘The Boyfriend’ is more than a dating show Dining Union Market’s Last Call Bar a welcoming oasis for all RAMMYs honors restaurant industry professionals Behind the bar with Moon Rabbit’s Thi Nguyen My Rehoboth Beach culinary tour New D.C. restaurants opening just in time for spring Theater What’s frightening is also funny in ‘Venus’ D.C.’s fall theater season is already well underway Actress takes on bisexual ‘Ma’ Rainey in new Round House production Immersive ‘Nation-State’ imagines a society free of authoritarianism New GALA show about WWII spy full of conflict, intrigue Film ‘Thelma and Louise’ remains landmark of unspoken queer rebellion ‘Here the Whole Time’ delivers queer coming-of-age comedy ‘Teenage Sex and Death’ has never been more entertaining Queer team brings girl power to fully baked ‘The Wrong Girls’ ‘Maddie’s Secret’ defies campy expectations Music Queer mega stars coming to D.C. this fall DJ Chanel Santini is bringing the heat and some gender-fluid diversity to XBIZ Miami Gaga, Cardi B, and more to grace D.C. stages this spring Washington chorale kicks off Christmas with vibrant program Queer mega stars (and allies) ready to take D.C. stages this fall Books Curl up with a good book this fall Dolly Parton biography puts her hardships into context Historiography with heart New book examines fashionista Audrey Smaltz’s fabulous life New book examines Trump cuts to LGBTQ healthcare Photos PHOTOS: HRC National Dinner PHOTOS: Shenandoah Valley Pride PHOTOS: Walk and 5K to End HIV PHOTOS: Wanda Alston Foundation Fall Reception PHOTOS: SMYAL Fall Brunch Best of Gay DC Contests Financial Factors to consider when hiring an interior designer The LGBTQ real estate map is being redrawn Moving presents a chance to ‘clean house’ With gas prices soaring again, a staycation is a good plan When buying a home, it’s decisions, decisions, decisions Health United States Conference on HIV/AIDS grapples with federal budget cuts AIDS Healthcare Foundation announces 3 million people globally in its care LGBTQ people, weed, and mental health: what you need to know UPDATED: Trans-led HIV clinic in Portsmouth struggles amid funding cuts Housewives head to Capitol Hill to promote PrEP coverage News United States Conference on HIV/AIDS grapples with federal budget cuts AIDS Healthcare Foundation announces 3 million people globally in its care LGBTQ people, weed, and mental health: what you need to know UPDATED: Trans-led HIV clinic in Portsmouth struggles amid funding cuts Housewives head to Capitol Hill to promote PrEP coverage Cannabis Culture LGBTQ people, weed, and mental health: what you need to know New Mexico guv signs marijuana legalization Delaware cannabis activists take on corporate marijuana Virginia marijuana legalization takes effect July 1 Highstream 420 Festival Livestream Fitness NEW YEAR NEW YOU 2020: Local VIDA master trainer on trends, tips and technology at the gym Why a personalized diet can help you achieve better results Al Roker blasts Jillian Michaels for criticizing Keto diet Make 2019 your year for fitness Raising healthy adults starts now Classifieds About Newsletter Sign-Up Print Edition Archives Advertise Los Angeles Blade BECOME A MEMBER Comoros Comoros court convicts lesbian couple, sentences them to months in jail Country’s penal code criminalizes consensual same-sex sexual relations Published 2 years ago on December 23, 2024 By Daniel Itai (Bigstock photo) Share Tweet A court in Comoros on Dec. 12 sentenced two lesbian women to five and six months in prison respectively after it found them guilty of homosexuality. Authorities arrested the young couple in June on allegations they engaged in same-sex sexual relations and asked an imam to marry them. The women had been in custody since their arrest, which prompted the judge to release them with time served. Human Dignity Trust, an international human rights organization, described the couple’s conviction as a violation of human rights. “The conviction of the lesbian couple calls for increased vigilance,” said the group. “The mere existence of this provision is itself a violation of human rights and underpins further acts of discrimination.” Susan Dicklitch-Nelson, a researcher at Franklin and Marshall College in Pennsylvania, said LGBTQ people are being used as scapegoats for the current social and economic ills. “LGBT people remain some of the most targeted and vulnerable people,” she said. “They have been branded as social pariahs and scapegoated for the economic, political, and social ills.” Article 318 of Comoros’s penal code criminalizes “improper or unnatural acts between persons of the same-sex.” The punishment for engaging in same-sex relations includes a fine, a prison sentence or both, with up to five years imprisonment. Although the lesbian couple’s conviction and sentencing is a first in the East African country for violating Article 318, Human Dignity Trust said it is not a clear reflection of the current state of LGBTQ people in Comoros. “There is limited evidence of discrimination and violence being committed against LGBT people in recent years, however, the lack of LGBT organizations and the hostile environment for LGBT people likely contributes to this lack of information,” said Human Dignity trust. Comoros is an archipelago of just over 1 million people in the Mozambique Channel between Madagascar and Mozambique. Cyclone Chido on Dec. 14 devastated Mayotte, a French territory that is part of the Comoro Islands. Comoros is predominantly Muslim, which shapes attitudes towards homosexuality in the country. African culture is also seen as contradictory to the idea of same-sex sexual relations, which the country champions. This hostility makes it even more difficult for LGBTQ people to come out and for their families and friends to support them. Some advocacy groups see growing calls to further criminalize LGBTQ people in East Africa and impose more harsh sentences for consensual same-sex sexual relations has, and will contribute to more legislative crackdowns against the LGBTQ community in Comoros. Coming out has huge ramifications that can even prompt some LGBTQ people to enter into heterosexual marriages arranged by their families. Those who decide to come out often take precautions to avoid being noticed. Some even flee Comoros and seek refuge in South Africa, Cabo Verde, and other countries that have decriminalized homosexuality. Information on LGBTQ people in Comoros, however, is scarce because of the lack of LGBTQ organizations and human rights advocacy groups. The Human Rights Campaign and Human Rights First in a 2014 report suggested there have been at least three convictions under Article 318 of the penal code. Related Topics: Africa Comoros featured Franklin and Marshall College Human Dignity Trust Human Rights Campaign Human Rights First Susan Dicklitch-Nelson Advertisement FUND LGBTQ JOURNALISM SIGN UP FOR E-BLAST Featured Local Savings You may like PHOTOS: HRC National Dinner Grace Meng sharply criticizes DOJ over hospital settlements Gov. Whitmer to serve as keynote speaker for Saturday’s HRC National Dinner Advertisement Latest Popular Real Estate 16 minutes ago Factors to consider when hiring an interior designer Photos 3 hours ago PHOTOS: HRC National Dinner Real Estate 6 hours ago The LGBTQ real estate map is being redrawn Advice 7 hours ago I’m 66, he’s 27. Is it love or am I being played? Theater 7 hours ago What’s frightening is also funny in ‘Venus’ Commentary 4 days ago Washington Blade responds to concerns over White House pool duties LGBTQ Non-Profit Organizations 4 days ago Gov. Whitmer to serve as keynote speaker for Saturday’s HRC National Dinner Fiji 4 days ago Spike in HIV cases prompts Fiji to declare national emergency District of Columbia 4 days ago Capital Pride chair resigns from board after just 10 months Online Culture 4 days ago Clavicular charged in alleged rape of teenage influencer Advertisement Sign Up for Weekly E-Blast Advertisement Popular Commentary 4 days ago Washington Blade responds to concerns over White House pool duties LGBTQ Non-Profit Organizations 4 days ago Gov. Whitmer to serve as keynote speaker for Saturday’s HRC National Dinner Fiji 4 days ago Spike in HIV cases prompts Fiji to declare national emergency District of Columbia 4 days ago Capital Pride chair resigns from board after just 10 months About Advertise Contact Us Find A Copy Classifieds Privacy Policy Terms of Service RSS Syndication © Copyright Brown, Naff, Pitts Omnimedia, Inc. 2021. All rights reserved | Powered by Keynetik .