Ghana passes law criminalising identifying as LGBTQ+ - JURIST - News DONATE NOW News ▾ All Legal News US Legal News World Legal News This Day @ Law Dispatches ▾ All Dispatches Afghanistan Canada EU Ghana India Iran Israel Italy Kazakhstan Kenya Myanmar Pakistan Peru Romania Sri Lanka Taiwan UK Ukraine US Commentary ▾ All Commentary Faculty Commentary Professional Commentary Student Commentary Features ▾ All Features Explainers Long Reads Multimedia Interviews Topics Rule of Law ▾ Materials Podcasts About ▾ FAQ Staff Awards Apply Journalist in Residence Board of Directors Contact Us Donate ▾ Why Support JURIST? Donate Honor Roll Search: Search News Wgsohne , CC BY-SA 3.0 , via Wikimedia Commons Ghana passes law criminalising identifying as LGBTQ+ Aimee Woodmass | Newcastle Law School, GB February 28, 2024 05:11:13 pm The Parliament of Ghana passed a bill Wednesday that makes it illegal to identify as LGBTQ+ in Ghana. The Promotion of Proper Human Sexual Rights and Ghanaian Family Values Bill 2021 states that anyone who is found to be LGBTQ+ in the country could be imprisoned. Ghana’s Parliament passed the bill by a unanimous vote following the completion of its third reading in parliament. Under this new law, anyone identifying as LGBTQ+ could face up to three year in prison, while anyone who forms or funds LGBTQ+ groups could face up to 5 years in prison. The bill states that its intention is as follows: The object of the Bill is to provide for proper human sexual rights and Ghanaian family values; proscribe LGBTQ+ and related activities; proscribe propaganda of, advocacy for or promotion of LGBTTQQIAAP+ and related activities; provide for the protection and support for children, persons who are victims or accused of LGBTTQQIAAP+ and related activities and other person; and related matters. The bill was formed in response to Ghana’s first LGBTQ+ advocacy resource centre opening in Accra in January 2021. According to the bill, this event was “greeted with a plethora of criticism from a cross section of Ghanaians” and the centre was closed following public protests. At the time, the National House of Chiefs issues a statement regarding the centre, affirming that “nowhere does the Ghanaian culture subscribe to LGBTQI which is a taboo, inhuman and alien to our society.” Member of Parliament Sam George, a strong supporter of the bill, spoke to reporters after the vote. He stated that their “cultural values are upheld and respected” by the bill. When asked whether there was opposition to the bill, George stated “We may have had one or two members express divisions, but that is their democratic right. We respect it but the overwhelming majority of both sides of the house have supported this bill.” The bill will be forwarded to President Nana Akufo-Addo, who must assent the bill before it becomes law in Ghana. GET OUR DAILY DIGEST Email Address Subscribe Key: Subscribe Latest DISPATCHES Pakistan dispatch: Supreme Court defers jailed former PM’s medical case amid jurisdictional dispute Taiwan dispatch: motion for retrial filed over 2000 execution amid miscarriage of justice concerns Latest COMMENTARY Can the US Keep a Diplomat Out of the UN? by Matthew R. Morley | Morley & Associates | US | Russia The Rule of Law Has Been Miserable to Measure. That Just Changed. by David Stasior | Broken Scales Latest FEATURES ‘Accountability Is Deferred Rather Than Delivered’ — Conflict Resolution Scholar Johannes Langer on Mediation, Amnesty, and the Limits of the ICC ‘Genocide denial is often a state project’ — Iva Vukušić on Srebrenica and the politics of memory THIS DAY @ LAW Warren Commission report on the Kennedy assassination released On September 27, 1964, the report of the Warren Commission chaired by Chief Justice Earl Warren on the Kennedy assassination was released. The report essentially concluded that Lee Harvey Oswald had acted alone. Review the Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy . WWII Axis Powers formed On September 27, 1940, Chancellor Adolf Hitler of Germany, Foreign Minister Galeazzo Ciano of Italy and Ambassador Saburo Kurusu of Japan signed the Tripartite Pact , creating the World War II alliance of the Axis Powers. The Pact was later assented to by other members of the Axis, including Hungary, Romania, Croatia, Slovakia, Bulgaria, and the Kingdom of Yugoslavia. Home Attributions Disclaimer Privacy Policy Contact Us Copyright © 2026, JURIST Legal News & Research Services, Inc. JURISTnews is a collaboration with the University of Pittsburgh