Returning and LGBTQI+ - Crosscare Irish Diaspora Support Project Skip to main content Hit enter to search or ESC to close Search Close Search x-twitter facebook linkedin youtube instagram tiktok Get Help Donate search Menu search Menu About Donate to Crosscare Who We Are Mission Our Team History Our Funders What We Do Our Impact Events Knowledge Hub Policy and Research Training Enquiries News Leaving Ireland Find Irish Groups Near You Information Irish Diaspora Directory Working Holidays Your Journey Deciding to Emigrate Before You Go Upon Arrival Minding Yourself Working Holidays Returning to Ireland Returning in Crisis Information Accommodation Disability and Carer Supports Driving and Transportation Education Employment Finance Finance Healthcare Habitual Residence Condition Irish Citizenship PPS Numbers Social Welfare Wellbeing Information 2 Healthcare Habitual Residence Condition Irish Citizenship PPS Numbers Social Welfare Wellbeing I Am… Returning in Crisis Returning with Children Returning with Non-Irish Family Returning to Northern Ireland Returning to Retire Returning and LGBTQI+ Knowledge Hub Policy and Research Consular Area Resources for Partners Training Enquiries Events Upcoming Events Previous Events News Contact Us Returning and LGBTQI+ Information and supports for LGBTQI+ Irish citizens returning to Ireland from abroad Returning to Ireland after time away can be exciting, emotional, and sometimes overwhelming. For LGBTQI+ people, there may be additional considerations around accessing inclusive services, reconnecting with community, and understanding your rights at home. This guide brings together key information to help LGBTQI+ Irish citizens plan a smooth transition back to Ireland. It was developed in consultation with TENI – Transgender Equality Network and LGBT Ireland. Your Rights in Ireland Ireland is recognised internationally as a defender of LGBTQI+ rights. As a returning Irish citizen, you are entitled to the full protections of Irish equality and human rights law. Key rights include: Marriage equality for same-sex couples Legal gender recognition through self-determination for transgender men and women aged 18+ Protection from discrimination in employment, education, housing, and access to goods and services on the basis of gender and sexual orientation Anti-hate crime protections and support services Access to healthcare, including mental health supports It is important to note that gaps still exist in relation to legal protections, application of equality legislation and service provision (including healthcare and housing). There can also be lengthy waitlists for public services and a lack of LGBTQI+ specific healthcare services. If you have concerns about documentation, recognition of foreign marriages, or gender markers on legal documents, dedicated support organisations can offer guidance (see below for details). Housing, Employment and Practical Considerations Relocating often means navigating accommodation, securing work, reintegration into administrative systems and re-establishing social supports. Accommodation Ireland is currently experiencing a shortage of affordable accommodation, and it can take time and effort to secure even short-term rental accommodation. Try to make sure that you have a plan in place and somewhere to stay on arrival. Learn more in our guide to accommodation for returnees. Employment Irish equality law protects employees from discrimination based on sexual orientation, and gender, which typically covers trans and non-binary people.. Many workplaces have diversity policies and active LGBTQI+ networks. If you have been abroad for a long period, learn more about employment as well as social welfare supports for returnees. Education If you are considering a return to education in Ireland, or you are returning with school age children, read our education guide for information on school enrolment, Irish exemptions and more. In relation to the rights of LGBTQI+ young people in school, see relevant guidance from the Department of Education . Healthcare & Wellbeing Ireland provides public healthcare through the Health Service Executive (HSE), with additional private options. LGBTQI+-informed healthcare is available, though access can vary by region. Services include: Sexual health testing and clinics Gender-affirming healthcare pathway supports and information Mental health services with LGBTQI+ affirming practitioners Free HIV support services and medication access The first step is normally to register with a family doctor (also known as a General Practitioner or GP) in Ireland, who can then refer you on for specialist care. Be aware that waiting lists for many specialist services can be very long (months or years in some cases) and that there is currently a GP shortage in Ireland which is also impacting waiting times. Read more about what you need to know about healthcare in Ireland and wellbeing for those returning to Ireland. The HSE also has a guide on getting help for your mental health if you’re LGBTQI+ . Transgender and Non-Binary Returnees Gender Recognition Ireland allows adults aged 18+ to self-declare their gender as male or female for the purpose of obtaining a Gender Recognition Certificate (GRC) . This can then be used to update your Irish passport, birth certificate, and other official records. TENI – Transgender Equality Network Ireland have a helpful guide to applying for a Gender Recognition Certificate . Gender-Affirming Healthcare Although gender-affirming healthcare is available in Ireland through public and/or private pathways, waiting times through the public health system are considerably longer than other countries (including the USA, UK and many EU countries). The National Gender Service is Ireland’s only public gender clinic. It accepts referrals for people age 17 or over who wish to begin medical transition. Estimated waiting times for a first appointment are over 10 years. Some hospital endocrinologists will accept trans patients for hormone replacement therapy (HRT as part of their public or private clinics. They may require a referral from a clinical psychologist or psychiatrist. Private providers specify their own referral pathways and criteria. If you are already receiving gender-affirming healthcare abroad, you may be able to have your prescription continued in Ireland once you have registered with a family doctor (also known as a General Practitioner or GP). Be aware that not every GP in Ireland will do this and you will usually need to provide documentation regarding your treatment, prescriptions and other documentation to show that you have been getting this care safely and legally. Rights in Ireland Learn more about your rights in Ireland as a Trans or Non-Binary person in this guide by the Irish Council for Civil Liberties, ShoutOut and TENI – Transgender Equality Network Ireland . Here you can also find out more information on legal gender recognition, gender-affirming care pathways, protections from discrimination, violence and hate, and the rights of transgender and gender diverse young people. Returning With a Non-Irish Spouse, Partner or Other Family If you are returning with your non-Irish partner, spouse, or other family members , our section on returning with non-Irish family will help you to better understand and navigate the Irish immigration system. If you are a parent returning with children , read our guide for more information on things like child-related supports and the Irish educational system. Community and Support For many returnees, reconnecting with community is an important part of feeling at home. A wide range of organisations based in Ireland provide confidential advice, peer support, advocacy, and connections for LGBTQI+ people of all ages. You can find some of these below: BeLonG To Youth Services is a national organisation for LGBTQ+ young people and provides youth groups, mental health supports, education programmes, and advocacy LGBT Ireland is a national organisation providing support, training, and advocacy to improve the lives of LGBT+ people across Ireland. They have a useful list of LGBTQ+ support services around Ireland , offer an Instant Messaging Support Service , as well as a National LGBT+ Helpline and Transgender Family Support Line Outhouse LGBTQ+ Centre is a safe, inclusive space for the LGBTQ+ community in Dublin, Ireland ShoutOut is an Irish charity committed to improving life for LGBTQ+ people by sharing personal stories and running educational programmes TENI – Transgender Equality Network Ireland is a non-profit organisation that advocates for the rights and acceptance of transgender people in Ireland Intersex Ireland is Ireland’s intersex-led community and advocacy organisation Ireland has changed significantly in recent years and LGBTQI+ returnees now often find a diverse LGBTQI+ community in Ireland. If you need assistance at any stage (before travelling, during the move, or after arriving) reach out . Returning to Ireland Information Accommodation Children Disability and Carer Supports Education Employment Irish Citizenship Habitual Residence Condition Healthcare Returning to Northern Ireland Returning to Retire Social Welfare Driving and Transportation Returning and LGBTQI+ Page last updated on 25 June, 2026 Sign up for our newsletter: Email Submit Δ Contact Crosscare Irish Diaspora Support Project 2 St Mary’s Place North, D07 Y768 Email: irishdiasporasupport@crosscare.ie Phone: +353 (0)1 891 3050 RCN 20169084 | CHY 6262 Funded by Privacy Statement | Cookie Policy | Disclaimer | Data Protection Policy | Accessibility Statement x-twitter facebook linkedin youtube instagram tiktok © 2026 Crosscare Irish Diaspora Support Project. | Site built by SCSWeb.ie Close Menu About Donate to Crosscare Who We Are Mission Our Team History Our Funders What We Do Our Impact Events Knowledge Hub Policy and Research Training Enquiries News Leaving Ireland Find Irish Groups Near You Information Irish Diaspora Directory Working Holidays Your Journey Deciding to Emigrate Before You Go Upon Arrival Minding Yourself Working Holidays Returning to Ireland Returning in Crisis Information Accommodation Disability and Carer Supports Driving and Transportation Education Employment Finance Finance Healthcare Habitual Residence Condition Irish Citizenship PPS Numbers Social Welfare Wellbeing Information 2 Healthcare Habitual Residence Condition Irish Citizenship PPS Numbers Social Welfare Wellbeing I Am… Returning in Crisis Returning with Children Returning with Non-Irish Family Returning to Northern Ireland Returning to Retire Returning and LGBTQI+ Knowledge Hub Policy and Research Consular Area Resources for Partners Training Enquiries Events Upcoming Events Previous Events News Contact Us Get Help Donate x-twitter facebook linkedin youtube instagram tiktok English (UK) English (UK) English Deutsch Español Français Italiano Polski Svenska Suomi Português Română Slovenščina Slovenčina Nederlands Dansk Ελληνικά Čeština Magyar Lietuvių Latviešu Eesti Hrvatski Gaeilge Български Norsk Türkçe Bahasa Indonesia Português (Brasil) 日本語 한국어 简体中文 العربية Русский हिन्दी Українська Srpski فارسی עברית Македонски ไทย Tiếng Việt Accessibility Adjustments Powered by OneTap Hide Toolbar Back How long do you want to hide the toolbar? Hide Toolbar Duration Only for this session 24 hours A Week Not Now Hide Toolbar Select your accessibility profile Vision Impaired Mode Enhances website's visuals Vision Impaired Mode Seizure Safe Profile Clear flashes & reduces color Seizure Safe Profile ADHD Friendly Mode Focused browsing, distraction-free ADHD Friendly Mode Blindness Mode Reduces distractions, improves focus Blindness Mode Epilepsy Safe Mode Dims colors and stops blinking Epilepsy Safe Mode Content Modules Font Size + Default - Readable Font Line Height + Default - Cursor Letter Spacing Align Text Font Weight Color Modules Light Contrast High Contrast Monochrome Orientation Modules Reading Line Reading Mask Hide Images Highlight Content Stop Animations Highlight Links Skip To Content Choose... Main Content Navigation Footer Reset Settings