Safety and security - Iceland travel advice - GOV.UK Cookies on GOV.UK We use some essential cookies to make this website work. We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services. We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services. You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. Accept additional cookies Reject additional cookies View cookies Hide cookie message Skip to main content GOV.UK Navigation menu Menu Menu Services and information Benefits Births, death, marriages and care Business and self-employed Childcare and parenting Citizenship and living in the UK Crime, justice and the law Disabled people Driving and transport Education and learning Employing people Environment and countryside Housing and local services Money and tax Passports, travel and living abroad Visas and immigration Working, jobs and pensions Government activity Departments Departments, agencies and public bodies News News stories, speeches, letters and notices Guidance and regulation Detailed guidance, regulations and rules Research and statistics Reports, analysis and official statistics Policy papers and consultations Consultations and strategy Transparency Data, Freedom of Information releases and corporate reports Search GOV.UK × Search GOV.UK Search Search GOV.UK Search Home Passports, travel and living abroad Travel abroad Foreign travel advice Foreign travel advice Iceland Contents Warnings and insurance Entry requirements Safety and security Health Getting help Subscriptions Get email alerts Safety and security Terrorism There is a high threat of terrorist attack globally affecting UK interests and British nationals, including from groups and individuals who view the UK and British nationals as targets. Stay aware of your surroundings at all times. UK Counter Terrorism Policing has information and advice on staying safe abroad and what to do in the event of a terrorist attack. Find out how to reduce your risk from terrorism while abroad . Terrorism in Iceland Although there’s no recent history of terrorism in Iceland, attacks cannot be ruled out. Crime Crime levels are low but petty theft and antisocial behaviour can occur, particularly around bars in downtown Reykjavík. Take sensible precautions and keep your belongings safe. Laws and cultural differences Personal ID You do not have to carry your passport with you, but it is sensible to have some form of ID, such as a photocard driving licence. You could also carry a copy of your passport’s photo page as ID. Keep your passport somewhere safe. Smoking and e-cigarette bans It is illegal to smoke or use e-cigarettes in restaurants, bars, public transport and public buildings, and you could get a fine. Illegal drugs Illegal drugs, even small amounts, including cannabis and khat carry severe penalties. You should expect a long jail sentence and heavy fines for possessing, using or smuggling illegal drugs, including when transiting through the airport. Airports in Iceland have excellent technology and security for detecting illegal items. This is also used to scan the baggage of transiting passengers. LGBT+ travellers Same-sex sexual activity is legal in Iceland and same-sex relationships are recognised in law. Read more advice for LGBT+ travellers . Outdoor activities and adventure tourism Hiking, mountaineering and other adventure sports have specific risks. You should: read the Safe Travel Iceland guides leave travel plans and contact details with your hotel, or on Safe Travel Iceland take a phone with you Hiking and mountaineering When hiking, choose a trail suited for your level of experience. Conditions in Iceland could be different to what you’re used to. Going too close to the ocean, cliff edges and hot springs are common causes of accidents in Iceland. Take enough food, equipment, clothing and emergency rations for the worst-case scenario. Use a map, compass, GPS and phone. Transport risks Road travel If you are planning to drive in Iceland, see information on driving abroad and check the rules of the road in the RAC’s Iceland guide . The guide lists driving regulations and other legal requirements you need to be aware of or risk a sizeable fine up to £500. Follow speed limits, keep dipped headlights on year-round, and have suitable tyres, including tyres for winter weather when needed. Drink driving limits are also lower than the UK. You can use a UK photocard driving licence to drive in Iceland for up to 30 days. If you still have a paper driving licence, you may need to update it to a photocard licence or get the 1968 version of the international driving permit ( IDP ) as well. Hire car companies often have stricter requirements for their customers, such as a year of driving experience, a higher minimum age and holding an IDP . If you bring your own car, check if you need a UK sticker to drive it outside the UK . Driving conditions Driving in Iceland can be very different to the UK, the weather can change quickly and make driving conditions challenging at times. Speed limits are lower than in the UK and the distances between towns are far greater. Some main routes can be gravel or dirt tracks. Roads can be narrower than you might be familiar with. Some routes, including bridges, are only a single lane with passing areas. On gravel and loose surfaces, reduce your speed. Many highland tracks are only open for a short part of the summer. Some roads, such as in the highlands or interior roads, require 4-wheel drive. Drive slowly (5 to 10 kilometres per hour) when you cross rivers. River levels can change quickly, even within the same day. The weather can cause damage to rental cars that is not covered by insurance. Strong winds are common and can throw sand or ash up, damaging paintwork. British tourists have had to pay large amounts of money to repair damage to hire cars caused by sand and ash. Breakdown recovery costs, especially in remote areas, can be high. Check road and weather advice from the Icelandic Road Administration . They also have information on off-road driving, which is strictly controlled. Electric Scooters Riding a scooter after consuming alcohol is prohibited by law in Iceland. The same law as driving a car under the influence applies and will resort in a fine and or charges. Extreme weather and natural disasters Find out what you can do to prepare for and respond to extreme weather and natural hazards . Volcanic eruptions and earthquakes Volcanic eruptions and earthquakes are common in Iceland given the country’s geography. In the event of an eruption or wider seismic activity, always follow the latest advice issued by the authorities, including on areas to avoid and actions to take if air quality is affected. Since December 2023, there have been a series of volcanic eruptions on the Reykjanes peninsula in south-west Iceland, the latest started on 16 July 2025. These eruptions have affected the town of Grindavik and the surrounding area. The capital city, Reykjavik, Keflavik International Airport and the rest of Iceland have not been affected by this series of eruptions. It is likely that there will be further eruptions on the Reykjanes peninsula. You should closely monitor local media for updates and always follow the authorities’ advice on travel to, or near to, the area of an ongoing eruption. Gas pollution levels can quickly exceed dangerous levels in the immediate vicinity of an eruption site. Depending on weather conditions, while an eruption is ongoing gas pollution and volcanic haze may also spread beyond the immediate area so pay particular attention to local alerts and advice. Never attempt to walk on newly solidified lava as the surface crust can break without warning. Regularly check for alerts and advice from: Icelandic Met Office Safe Travel Iceland Icelandic Environment and Energy agency on gas pollution the Icelandic tourist board Almannavarnir Facebook page The Government of Iceland monitors all seismic and volcanic activity closely and infrastructure is robustly designed, but not all events can be anticipated and can pose risks to your travel plans. This could include travel delays and cancellations due to rock falls and landslides, sudden flooding, or poisonous volcanic gases near eruption sites. Further information on volcanic eruptions and earthquakes in Iceland can be found from the following organisations: Icelandic Department of Civil Protection and Emergency Management – includes health and safety advice Icelandic Road and Coastal Administration Institute of Earth Sciences London Volcanic Ash Advisory Centre Icelandic National Broadcasting Service Arctic travel Iceland is in the Arctic Circle: emergency medical assistance and search and rescue may be limited in some areas. See Arctic travel safety advice . Previous : Entry requirements Next : Health View a printable version of the whole guide Related content About Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office travel advice Travel or do business in Europe: Brexit guidance Support for British nationals abroad Foreign travel checklist UK help and services in Iceland Explore the topic Living in Iceland Travelling to Iceland Is this page useful? Maybe Yes this page is useful No this page is not useful Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Do not include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab and requires JavaScript ) . Cancel Services and information Benefits Births, death, marriages and care Business and self-employed Childcare and parenting Citizenship and living in the UK Crime, justice and the law Disabled people Driving and transport Education and learning Employing people Environment and countryside Housing and local services Money and tax Passports, travel and living abroad Visas and immigration Working, jobs and pensions Government activity Departments News Guidance and regulation Research and statistics Policy papers and consultations Transparency How government works Get involved Support links Help Privacy Cookies Accessibility statement Contact Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg Government Digital Service All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0 , except where otherwise stated © Crown copyright