Homosexuality isn't our Problem-Says President Kagame - KT PRESS Home News National Regional International Business & Tech Companies Economy Markets Technology Special Reports Voices Sports Society ShowBiz Search About us Contact us Advertise Home News National Regional International Business & Tech Companies Economy Markets Technology Special Reports Voices Sports Society ShowBiz Search Search Search National Business & Tech Economy Markets Special Reports Live reporting Home » Homosexuality isn’t our Problem–Says President Kagame National Homosexuality isn’t our Problem–Says President Kagame by KT Press Staff Writer September 25, 2016 written by KT Press Staff Writer September 25, 2016 2K President Paul Kagame at Rwanda Cultural Day convened at San Francisco President Paul Kagame has assured the Rwandan Diaspora and friends that Rwanda is a peaceful country where everyone is supportive of each other. The Rwandan head of state was speaking at Rwanda Cultural Day convened in San Francisco, California. Commended for championing gender equality, the president was inquired about the possibility of living in Rwanda as LGBT (Lesibian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender). For President Kagame who first took a minute-long pause, said,” it hasn’t been our problem. And we don’t intend to make it our problem.” According to Article 26 of Rwanda’s constitution, “Only civil monogamous marriage between a man and a woman is recognized. No person may be married without his or her free consent. Parties to a marriage have equal rights and duties upon and during the subsistence of a marriage and at the time of divorce. The law determines conditions, forms and effect of marriage.” However, sexual orientation is a private matter, not a state business. Rwanda is considered a leader in the progress on human rights for LGBT persons in East Africa. In 2010 Rwanda eliminated the criminalisation provision from its draft code and recently signed two UN resolutions on sexual orientation and gender identity, as the only African nation to do so. Participants at Rwanda Cultural Day in San Francisco California Visited 4,926 times, 1 visit(s) today 0 comments 0 Facebook Twitter Pinterest Email KT Press Staff Writer previous post American Philanthropist Shares his Rwandan Dream next post Marriott Rwanda Gets new Partner Hotel in Kigali You may also like Nsengiyumva: AI Governance Cannot Be Inclusive Without Countries... September 25, 2026 How Climate Change Is Eating into the Growth... September 25, 2026 Rwanda Uses Marburg Experience to Make Case for... September 25, 2026 Ten Years After Kigali Amendment, the Race to... September 24, 2026 At UNGA81, Rwanda Challenges the UN to measure... September 24, 2026 BioMassters Brings Cleaner, Lower-cost, No-smoke Cooking to over... September 23, 2026 Government Commits to End Persistent Power Outages by... September 23, 2026 Beyond Diplomacy, Rwanda and China Mark 55 Years... September 23, 2026 East Africa Seeks Greater Control Over Vaccines and... September 22, 2026 Rwanda’s First Agriculture Venture Studio Opens Applications, Offers... September 22, 2026 Facebook Twitter Instagram Flickr Youtube @ KT PRESS 2014 - 2026 . All Right Reserved. Back To Top Jojobet Giriş marsbahis giriş Home News National Regional International Business & Tech Companies Economy Markets Technology Special Reports Voices Sports Society ShowBiz