Stubbs' gay sex bill wins MP's support - The Royal Gazette | Bermuda News, Business, Sports, Events, &amp; Community | Stubbs’ gay sex bill wins MP’s support – The Royal Gazette | Bermuda News, Business, Sports, Events, & Community Log In Reset Password Home Year In Review Bermuda Budget Election 2025 News All News Crime Stoppers Court Crime Education Ending Homelessness Entertainment General Health Labour Politics Tourism Transport Weather News Year in Review Business All Business RG Top Ten Navigate Bermuda Banking Bermuda Stock Exchange Economy General International Business Local Business Re-Insurance Technology Sport All Sport Pan Am Games RG Fantasy League Basketball Boxing Cricket Cycling Equestrian General Golf Gymnastics Rugby Running/Triathlon Sailing Soccer Swimming Tennis/Squash Track & Field Life All Life Arts & Entertainment Community Fashion Food & Wine Home & Away Religion Wellness Opinion All Opinion Editorials Letters to the Editor Opinion Writer Bermuda Youth Connect Political Cartoons RG Podcast Jobs Classifieds Obituaries Weather Digital edition RGMags Drive For Change Search Log in Log out Activate My account Subscribe ePaper Newsletter Advertise Terms of Service DIGITAL EDITION VIDEOS PHOTOS PODCAST RSS Log in / Register My Profile Logout Log in / Register Activate My account Subscribe ePaper Newsletter Advertise Search News Business Sport Life Opinion Jobs Obituaries Classifieds Subscribe 6A588259-FD9B-4835-ABFB-241954C220DB Stubbs' gay sex bill wins MP's support Royal Gazette Staff Created: May 14, 1994 11:00 AM A debate that split Bermuda ended early this morning as the House of Assembly voted to decriminalise sex between adult males. Attention turns to the Senate after the House voted 22-16 to remove two sections of the Criminal Code that made consensual sex between men in private illegal. But the private member's bill from the Hon. John Stubbs of the United Bermuda Party is expected to face relatively little opposition in the Upper Chamber. "This has been one of the most interesting and exciting days in recent Parliamentary history,'' Dr. Stubbs said just before the vote in which Premier the Hon. Sir John Swan opposed his motion and Opposition Leader Mr. Frederick Wade supported it. "I'm very pleased,'' Dr. Stubbs said later. "It was close, as we knew it would be.'' Mr. Peter Carpenter, spokesman for the Bermuda Human Rights Alliance, was congratulated by supporters in the packed public gallery. "I'm delighted,'' he said. Earlier, Bishop Charles Foster Fubler of the Christian Coalition was ordered out of the gallery after he began shouting while Mr. Leon (Jimmy) Williams of the Progressive Labour Party spoke in favour of the motion. It was clear early on that MPs would not agree to make 16 the age of consent for homosexual males, as proposed. Voting by their consciences, rather than party lines, they approved an amendment from the UBP's Mr. Trevor Moniz that increased the age of consent to 18. The day-long session capped months of debate in the community, where feelings on the issue crossed racial and socio-economic lines. Bermuda's religions were divided, with leaders of the Anglican and Roman Catholic churches favouring the amendment. Leaders of the AME and smaller churches with mostly black congregations were opposed. MPs faced intense lobbying, including letter-writing and telephone campaigns, from both sides. Generally, proponents saw the bill as a human rights issue. Decriminalising sex between consenting adult males would end discrimination and respect their privacy. Opponents generally saw gay sex as a moral "abomination'' which should not be condoned. In opposing the amendment, a religious alliance called the Christian Coalition staged marches on Parliament and prayer sessions outside the Sessions House. The BHRA, which led proponents of the bill, ran a lower-key campaign. A similar amendment came before the House in 1971 and was narrowly defeated in another free vote. Mr. Wade questioned how the state could punish immoral acts. While the BHRA had been "very reserved,'' Mr. Wade felt "those who are for retention have been trying to deny me my conscience.'' The PLP Leader said he was stunned by an attack on the Allan Vincent Smith Foundation by the Christian Coalition. "I don't care where a person gets AIDS,'' Mr. Wade said. "If they need a glass of water or a bed or medication, anyone who would deny that cannot speak to me about Christian values.'' Dr. David Dyer of the UBP attacked his Government for not bringing the amendment forward itself. "There was a serious lack of judgment, and even cowardice,'' Dr. Dyer told the House. He called on black colleagues to remember the past. "Many of your ancestors were locked up for something they had no control over, and those doing it felt justified in doing it.'' In introducing the bill, Dr. Stubbs emphasised that gays did not choose their sexual orientation, and he pointed out that the United Kingdom had decriminalised sex in private between adult males in 1967. But a large core of veteran PLP MPs, as well as Cabinet Ministers like Tourism Minister the Hon. C.V. (Jim) Woolridge, Transport Minister the Hon. Maxwell Burgess, and Culture and Communications Minister the Hon. Wayne Furbert emphasised the moral argument. "Bermuda up until now has been referred to as a paradise. Soon we'll be known as the fairyland,'' said Mr. Woolridge. HOW THEY VOTED Following is the breakdown of for and against votes on last night's Stubbs Bill to legalise gay sexual relations. FOR UBP -- The Hon. Pam Gordon, Mr. John Barritt, the Hon. John Stubbs, Dr. David Dyer, Mrs. Grace Bell, Mr. David Dodwell, Mr. Trevor Moniz, Mr. Rick Spurling, the Hon. J. Irving Pearman, the Hon. Quinton Edness, the Hon. Leonard Gibbons, the Hon. Clarence Terceira, the Hon. Jerome Dill, the Hon. Harry Soares. PLP -- Mrs. Lois Browne Evans, Mr. Frederick Wade, Miss Jennifer Smith, Mr. David Allen, Dr. Ewart Brown, Ms Renee Webb, Mr. Alex Scott, Mr. Leon (Jimmy) Williams. AGAINST UBP -- Mr. Tim Smith, the Hon. Wayne Furbert, the Hon. Ann Cartwright DeCouto, the Hon. C.V. (Jim) Woolridge, the Hon. Sir John Swan, the Hon. Maxwell Burgess. PLP -- Mr. Walter Lister, Mr. Walter Roberts, Mr. Eugene Cox, Mr. Stanley Morton, Mr. Reginald Burrows, Mr. Nelson Bascome, Mr. Dennis Lister, Mr. Stanley Lowe, Mr. Ottiwell Simmons, Rev. Trevor Woolridge. Absent -- the Hon. David Saul. Related Stories Water Safety council wants boater competence tests Programme to boost women’s work skills Bermudian journalism pioneer Ernest Tucker to be inducted into CBC Hall of Fame Salvation Army sees needs soar Related Media Preferred Posts Instagram Twitter youtube Facebook Instagram Twitter youtube Facebook Most Popular Today Most Commented 09/26/2026 Government pledges help for land-loss families 09/26/2026 Couple return to Bermuda for 30-year anniversary 09/25/2026 US man denies causing death through impaired driving 09/26/2026 Remembering the original Causeway 09/26/2026 Manders steps away from top Seventh-day Adventist role 09/25/2026 Emergency plane landing shuts down Causeway 09/26/2026 Retiring abroad series: Bath, England 09/26/2026 Sweeping pensions protections announced Your browser must support JavaScript to view this content. Please enable JavaScript in your browser settings then try again. Events calendar powered by Trumba Take Our Poll Should e-bikes be regulated like motorcycles? Yes, all of them Yes, but it should be graduated No Don’t know View Results Poll Archive Today's Obituaries View all Obituaries Place an obituary eMoo Posts RG Sound Lounge – The Latest Podcasts PUBLISHED: SEP 25, 2026 PUBLISHED: AUG 28, 2026 09/26/2026 Burt vows land loss help 09/25/2026 Throne speech off until PLP elects leader 09/23/2026 Alexa Lightbourne: Senate cost-of-living vote keeps status quo in place 09/26/2026 Water supply issues at Westgate Correctional Facility 09/25/2026 Dwayne Robinson: Minister of Home Affairs should listen to advice 09/26/2026 Bermuda needs execution and integrity, Mr Burt 09/24/2026 BGA food show draws hundreds to Pier 6 09/26/2026 Remembering the original Causeway 09/24/2026 Kim Smith: Handle with care – Bermuda’s construction boom 09/26/2026 Students savour taste of work experience in summer scheme Available for iPhones and iPads Available in Google Play News Business Sport Life Opinion Jobs Classifieds Weather Calendar Newsrack About Us Contact Us Subscribe Advertise Registration Privacy Notice Terms of Service Facebook Twitter Instagram Youtube RSS Feed Podcast Use of this website signifies your agreement to the Terms of Service and Privacy Notice © Copyright 2026 royalgazette.com. All rights reserved.