Social conservative lawmakers incensed over LGBT flag at Casa Presidencial Facebook Instagram X Youtube Local News Latin America News Expat Life Travel Weather Weather Forecast Weather Guide Cafe Finder Sports Soccer Tennis Wildlife Tico Shop Classifieds Advertise Search Tico Times COSTA RICA\'S LEADING ENGLISH LANGUAGE NEWSPAPER Sign in Welcome! Log into your account your username your password Forgot your password? Get help Privacy Password recovery Recover your password your email A password will be e-mailed to you. No menu items! Sign in / Join Tico Times Since 1956 Search COSTA RICA'S LEADING ENGLISH LANGUAGE NEWSPAPER Local News Latin America News Expat Life Travel Weather Weather Forecast Weather Guide Cafe Finder Sports Soccer Tennis Wildlife Tico Shop Classifieds Advertise Today in Costa Rica Costa Rica Takes Growing Role in U.S. Deportation Program Fernández Says “I Am the President” Amid Backlash Over Tovar Firing Tovar Firing Leaves Costa Rica Without a Foreign Minister for UN Speech Costa Rica Fires Foreign Minister After Trump Meeting Dispute Costa Rican Lawmakers Reject Minute of Silence for Man Who Died in ICE Custody Home Newsletter Social conservative lawmakers incensed over LGBT flag at Casa Presidencial Social conservative lawmakers incensed over LGBT flag at Casa Presidencial By The Tico Times May 16, 2014 Share Facebook X WhatsApp Email Lindsay Fendt/The Tico Times Social Conservative lawmakers lashed out at President Luis Guillermo Solís’ decision to fly the rainbow flag of the lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender movement Friday, saying that that the leader’s decision “provoked” Christian politicians. Lawmakers from the Costa Rican Renovation Party, National Restoration, Accessibility without Exclusion (PASE) and the Christian Democratic Alliance criticized the president’s deacons, reported CRHoy.com The president ordered the LGBT flag be raised on even mast with the Costa Rican tricolor Friday in recognition of the International Day Against Homophobia and Transphobia on May 17. Costa Rica has officially recognized the celebration since 2008. PASE lawmaker Óscar López said the act was a “ provocation ” at a time when there was a bill to allow same-sex civil unions pending in the Assmebly, reported AmelaiRueda.com “We are profoundly sad that President Solís did not set time out of his schedule for an activity for the Day of the Family or Farmer. This leaves us much to think about his priorities and we would like to know if he will fly the flags of other causes as well,” said Fabricio Alvarado, lawmaker for the conservative Christian National Restoration Party, according to CRHoy.com. Later in the morning Friday, Casa Presidencial said that they would celebrate other causes, including people with disabilities and HIV-AIDS, in a similar fashion. Solís denied that the decision was a provocation, saying, “I think this is in the spirt of fraternity and humanity, which is what we want to rescue.” The president said that he did not publicly celebrate the other events because of the on-going teachers’ strike , which began May 5. “Just because I wasn’t [celebrating yesterday] does not mean I’m not thinking about farmers,” Solís said on the lawn of Casa Presidencial, “There’s no double standard or lack of interest; it’s simply a lack of time.” The president noted that he keeps Costa Rica’s patron saint, the Virgin of the Angels in his office, and confirmed that he planned to attend midday mass in the Basilica Nuestra Señora de los Ángeles in Cartago, on Sunday. Not everyone in the church opposed the symbolic flag raising. The president of the Costa Rican fisheries institute, Incopesca, and ordained Catholic priest, Gustavo Meneses, ordered the LGBT standard fly over the institution, too, upon the request from Casa Presidencial, reported Monumental. Trending Now Human Trafficking Cases Reach 16-Year High in Costa Rica Costa Rica recorded 83 human trafficking victims in 2025, the highest number reported in any single year since at least 2010, according to figures... Read more Costa Rica Reaffirms Cuba Split After Havana Denies Being Notified Costa Rica's foreign minister spent the weekend defending a diplomatic split with Cuba that Havana says it was never formally told about, and by... Read more A Nostalgic Look Back at Life in Costa Rica From bankbooks and free bocas to machete-cut grass and Lada Nivas, a longtime resident looks back at the Costa Rica he first encountered and how the country has changed. Read more Remote Osa Eco-Lodge Playa Cativo Joins Small Luxury Hotels of the World Playa Cativo Lodge, a secluded beachfront retreat on the Golfo Dulce in Costa Rica's Southern Zone, has been admitted into Small Luxury Hotels of... Read more Brazil’s João Fonseca Pulls Out of Asian Tennis Swing to Focus on Recovery Brazilian tennis star João Fonseca has withdrawn from the upcoming Asian swing, including the Japan Open in Tokyo and the Shanghai Masters, as the... Read more More Than 50 Earthquakes Shake Area Around Costa Rica’s Irazú Volcano More than 50 small earthquakes struck the area around Irazú Volcano this morning, but seismologists say the activity points to movement along a shallow... Read more Costa Rica Expands Yellow Fever Vaccine Rule to Eight More Countries Costa Ricans and legal residents planning trips to several parts of South America and the Caribbean need to check their vaccination records before heading... Read more Dollar Rebounds From Record Low but Year-End Could Favor the Colón Again The dollar hit its highest level since June after a record low, but seasonal inflows could push it back down. Here is what banks are paying. Read more Costa Rica Data Center Proposal Draws Water Concerns Residents protested a possible data center in Bagaces on Saturday, raising concerns about water use and demanding more information, while the mayor said no... Read more The Tico Times Share Facebook X WhatsApp Email 🌴 The Weekly Pura Vida Costa Rica, Once a Week The week's top stories, weather & insider tips — delivered every Sunday. One email, zero clutter. 🔒 Free. No spam. Unsubscribe anytime. San José Guanacaste Limón Puntarenas Loading… Feels like Humidity Wind Full Costa Rica Forecast → Data: OpenWeatherMap Latest News from Costa Rica Costa Rica Expands Yellow Fever Vaccine Rule to Eight More Countries September 27, 2026 Demolished Pavones Restaurant owner releases book about the experience September 27, 2026 Who is behind Costa Rica’s proposed AI data centers? September 27, 2026 Costa Rica’s Laguna Río Cuarto Loses Visitor Services September 27, 2026 Three Missing After Being Swept Away at Tarrazú Waterfall and Guanacaste Beach September 26, 2026 Dollar Rebounds From Record Low but Year-End Could Favor the Colón Again September 26, 2026 Used-Car Importers Take Costa Rica’s New Vehicle Tax Formula to Court September 26, 2026 © 2026 The Tico Times Facebook Facebook Instagram Instagram RSS RSS X X Youtube Youtube Services Classifieds Costa Rica Advertising Write For Us RSS Feed Support About Us Corrections Policy Editorial Ethics Policy Privacy Terms of Service