Electra Leda Koutra and Anastasia Katzaki v. Greece loading... About Us Get involved Movement Building Advocacy Rainbow Map News Donate search About Us Toggle submenu back Who we are Toggle submenu back Our Constitution Standing Orders Annual reports Strategic plans How we’re funded Membership Team Work with us Media Centre Contacts Get involved Movement Building Toggle submenu back Our Annual Conference How we support the movement Our resource sharing centre How we fund the movement How we work with funders Our current programmes Advocacy Toggle submenu back Bodily Integrity Civil Rights and Freedom Health Inclusion and Equality Legal Protection Safety Rainbow Map News Facebook Instagram Youtube Vimeo LinkedIn TikTok Bluesky Threads Share Electra Leda Koutra and Anastasia Katzaki v. Greece 13.07.2017 Case Law European Court of Human Rights Greece Sex Work Strategic Litigation Trans scroll Detention and mistreatment of transgender sex workers and their lawyer . (Application no. 459/16), 13 July 2017 Find Court’s communication here. Electra Leda Koutra and Anastasia Katzaki v. Greece Download According to the applicants, from May to June 2013, transgender persons were stopped by police officers on streets or taken out from inside of their cars and subsequently brought to a police station in Greece. The first applicant, a lawyer and human rights activist went to the police station – in order to represent a transgender woman – where she was mistreated by the police and placed in a cell for about 20 minutes. The applicants’ complaints against the policemen in charge were discontinued by the Greece authorities. ILGA-Europe together with TGEU, Greek Transgender Support Association and International Committee on the Rights of Sex Workers in Europe addressed the following: As the facts of the case were representative of wider patterns of state persecution of (trans) sex workers in Greece and beyond, which typically included assault and arbitrary arrests the submission provided available evidence of this within the broader context. Detailed studies on the situation in Eastern Europe and Central Asia show that sex workers are confronted with high levels of violence from the part of state and non-state actors . Physical and sexual violence by the police reportedly occurs in the course or under the threat of arrest and detention. ‘Facially-neutral’ regulations are often misused to persecute trans sex workers. Studies suggest that trans sex workers in Eastern Europe and Central Asia face higher levels of violence by police than their cisgender peers. Hate crime targeting trans people remains mostly unreported. Even when complaints are duly lodged, police often refuse to register or investigate the allegations in question, effectively blocking the victims’ access to justice and safety. Trans people in Greece experience severe isolation, discrimination, prejudice and exclusion on the basis of their gender identity, particularly in relation to accessing and holding employment. Robust and accessible gender recognition procedures are still lacking, leaving many trans people without documents and educational certificates that match their gender identity and thus hindering their access to the regular job market. In order to make ends meet, many trans women turn to sex work, suffering additional stigma as a result. Trans sex workers often face systematic persecution , in the form of police crackdowns targeting marginalized groups . Regional and global standards underpin the States’ positive obligation to protect trans sex workers from violence . This includes conducting effective investigation of transphobic crime, particularly when perpetrated by law-enforcement agents and taking into account a bias motive related to gender identity at the sentencing stage. Furthermore, gender identity is a prohibited ground of discrimination under regional and international law. The ECtHR has already found a procedural violation of Article 14 in conjunction with Article 3, based on the authorities’ failure to undertake crucial investigatory steps, including an intersectional analysis, by taking into account the applicant’s “ special vulnerability “( B.S. v. Spain , no. 47159/08, 24 July 2012). National and other regional courts have followed the same approach. See also News 20.07.2026 UK Government’s Final KCSIE Guidance Fails to Protect Trans, Non-Binary and Intersex Children and Young People IGLYO, TGEU, ILGA-Europe, OII Europe, the European Pride Business Network, The Kite Trust, Trans+ Solidarity Alliance, TransActual, and Saba Ali – Equalities Advocate express serious […] read more Report 16.07.2026 Inventory of relevant SOGIESC case law and pending cases before the ECtHR and CJEU 2025/2026 Update ILGA-Europe has been publishing an inventory of relevant SOGIESC (sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression and sex characteristics) case law and pending cases before the […] read more News 01.06.2026 New UK draft Code of Practice intensifies exclusion of trans people TGEU, ILGA-Europe, IGLYO, OII Europe, EL*C, Rainbow Cities Network, the European Pride Business Network and the European Forum of LGBTI+ Christian Groups are deeply alarmed […] read more News 20.03.2026 Poland: Supreme Administrative Court confirms EU law obligation to recognise same-sex marriages concluded abroad On 20 March 2026, Poland’s Supreme Administrative Court issued a landmark ruling implementing an earlier CJEU judgment and confirming that the refusal to transcribe same-sex […] read more News 18.03.2026 Joint Statement: European LGBTI Organisations call on the Portuguese Parliament to reject bills attacking trans and intersex rights Proposals due to be debated in Portugal on 19 March and voted on 20 March could pave the way for rollbacks to legal gender recognition, […] read more News 12.03.2026 Landmark CJEU ruling demands Member States to ensure legal gender recognition to guarantee freedom of movement Today’s judgment by the Court of Justice of the EU (CJEU) says all member states must provide for legal gender recognition procedures allowing their citizens […] read more Blog 17.12.2025 Q & A: International Day to End Violence Against Sex Workers (17 December) 1. What is 17 December and why is it important? 17 December is the International Day to End Violence Against Sex Workers. It is a […] read more Blog 05.12.2025 Q&A: Everything you want to know about the recent ruling on recognition of same-sex marriages in the EU Here is a concise overview of what the new Court of Justice of the EU (CJEU) ruling means for same sex couples moving or living […] read more News 25.11.2025 We welcome the EU’s Top Court landmark judgment: Member States Must Recognise Same-Sex Marriages from Other EU Countries The EU Court of Justice has ruled that it is unlawful for Poland to refuse to recognise a same-sex marriage concluded by two Polish citizens […] read more Press Release 23.10.2025 From Courtrooms to Parliament: Lithuania Faces a Defining Moment for Family Equality Lithuania is entering a decisive phase in the recognition and protection of diverse families. Following landmark judicial rulings, civil partnership is now firmly on the […] read more Blog 26.09.2025 Black Sex Worker Collective: dismantling housing injustice, racism and whorephobia In Germany, new research carried out by Black Sex Worker Collective sheds light on how queer identity, migration status, race and sex work intersect to […] read more News 09.09.2025 Joint Statement: Landmark CJEU opinion demands legal gender recognition across EU A new opinion from Advocate General of the Court of Justice of the European Union says all member states must recognise the lived gender of […] read more News 07.08.2025 French Court orders end to mandatory gender titles on train tickets The ruling follows a CJEU judgment and marks a major step for data protection and gender inclusivity in the EU. France’s Supreme Administrative Court (Conseil […] read more News 17.07.2025 Joint statement welcoming European court’s ruling against Poland over anti-gay hate crime The European Court of Human Rights has issued a judgement against Poland for failing to properly investigate and prosecute a homophobic attack against a gay […] read more News Press Release 10.07.2025 Semenya v. Switzerland: Grand Chamber of the European Court of Human Rights Judgment Joint press release of the third-party interveners Today, 10 July 2025, in a pivotal judgment, the Grand Chamber of the European Court of Human Rights […] read more Press Release 12.06.2025 European Court rules Czech Republic violated trans rights with forced sterilisation In a pivotal judgment delivered today, the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) has found that the Czech Republic violates the rights of trans people […] read more Press Release 05.06.2025 Pride Ban Must Not Go Ahead as EU Advocate General Confirms Hungary’s ‘Child Protection Law’ Breaches EU Law In a major development, Advocate General of Europe’s top court has issued an opinion considering Hungary’s anti-LGBTI legislation to be in breach of EU law, […] read more News 26.05.2025 What the CJEU AG’s Opinion in the infringement case against Hungary means for LGBTI equality in the EU The CJEU Advocate General has just delivered her Opinion in the Commission v Hungary “EU values” infringement case (C-769/22) – a major CJEU case on […] read more News 03.04.2025 CJEU Advocate General: Member States Must Recognise Same-Sex Marriages from Other EU Countries An opinion from the EU Court of Justice’s Advocate General states that Member States must recognise same-sex marriages performed in other EU countries to ensure […] read more Report 20.03.2025 Inventory of relevant SOGIESC case law and pending cases before the ECtHR and CJEU 2025 In order to focus our strategic litigation efforts across Europe to fully protect and advance LGBTI rights, with this inventory ILGA-Europe wants to support members […] read more News 13.03.2025 Joint statement welcoming EU’s top court judgment to correct a trans man’s gender identity data in national registry Today, the European Court of Justice (CJEU) issued a judgment in the case of Deldits (C-247/23), stating that national authorities responsible for keeping public registers […] read more News 05.03.2025 European court rules teacher’s dismissal over gay blog violated free speech The European Court of Human Rights rendered a judgement in a case where the Polish authorities fired a school teacher for writing on a blog […] read more News 13.02.2025 Joint statement welcoming judgement on Russia’s failure to protect the privacy of personal data ILGA-Europe and the AIRE Centre welcome the judgement from the European Court of Human Rights in the case of Bazhenov and others v. Russia Last […] read more News 09.01.2025 Joint statement welcoming CJEU judgment to halt unlawful gender title collection The EU Court of Justice has judged that it is unlawful for France’s national railway company to force passengers to choose between ‘Mr’ and ‘Ms’ […] read more News 07.01.2025 Joint statement on today’s long-awaited judgment from the European Court of Human Rights on violations of LGBTI human rights in Armenia ILGA-Europe and TGEU celebrate the judgement of the European Court of Human Rights in the case of Minasyan and Others v. Armenia, upholding the rights […] read more News 19.12.2024 Lithuanian Court Declares anti-LGBTI law unconstitutional In a significant decision yesterday, Lithuania’s Constitutional Court ruled that a 15-year long ban on public depictions of LGBTI families should be repealed. The Constitutional […] read more News 18.12.2024 Joint statement on the decision to ban puberty blockers for trans youth in the UK The recent decision to indefinitely ban the private prescription of puberty blockers for trans youth in the UK marks a profoundly troubling development in the […] read more News 13.12.2024 Russia failed to respond adequately to politician’s homophobic verbal assault, European Court finds The European Court of Human Rights has found that Russia’s failure to respond adequately to homophobic verbal assault and physical threats by a politician against […] read more News 09.12.2024 New regulations pose greater risks to trans people in Turkey New changes from the Turkish authorities to the accessibility of hormones for trans people further threaten health and lives On 20 November, the Turkish Medicines […] read more News 04.12.2024 Top European Court holds hearing on Polish refusal to recognise same-sex marriage certificate Case could establish critical precedent for the freedom of movement of same-sex couples within the EU Yesterday, the Court of Justice of the European Union […] read more Subscribe to our newsletter Subscribe Highlights Who we are Team Work with us Annual Conference 2026 Rainbow Map News Contacts We are always open to hearing from you, whether it’s to find out more information about an aspect of our work, for a media enquiry, or to ask a question about our organisation. Click here for the form to contact us. Co-funded by the European Union. Views and opinions expressed are however those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union or of the granting authority. Neither the European Union nor the granting authority can be held responsible for them. ILGA-Europe gratefully acknowledge support from: Facebook Instagram Youtube Vimeo LinkedIn TikTok Bluesky Threads Copyright 2026 ILGA-Europe Powered by SOLOS Privacy policy loading...