UNFPA Bhutan | Fostering Awareness: Advancing LGBT+ Rights & Inclusivity in Bhutan UNFPA in Bhutan Home Who we are UNFPA in Bhutan Country Director UNFPA Asia & the Pacific UNFPA Global Work with us Programmes & Partnerships What we do Population Matters Young People Sexual and Reproductive Health Gender Equality Latest News Campaigns Events Publications Multimedia Data icon-srch Donate Go Back Home Donate Go Back Who we are UNFPA in Bhutan Country Director UNFPA Asia & the Pacific UNFPA Global Work with us Programmes & Partnerships Donate Go Back What we do Population Matters Young People Sexual and Reproductive Health Gender Equality Donate Go Back Latest News Campaigns Events Publications Multimedia Donate Go Back Data Donate Home Who we are What we do Latest Data Donate Language: EN Clear search Fostering Awareness: Advancing LGBT+ Rights & Inclusivity in Bhutan Home Latest Publications Fostering Awareness: Advancing LGBT+ Rights & Inclusivity in Bhutan Author UNFPA Number of pages 37 Technical Reports and Document Fostering Awareness: Advancing LGBT+ Rights & Inclusivity in Bhutan Publication date 31 March 2025 Full Report In 2024, the Free & Equal campaign in Bhutan focused advancing support for LGBTIQ+ equality among policymakers, parliamentarians, and key institutions such as the Royal Court of Justice, the Office of the Attorney General, and the Cabinet Secretariat. Through targeted advocacy, training sessions, and workshops, the campaign contributed to policy discussions, raised awareness, and fostered a more inclusive environment for LGBTIQ+ people in the country. The campaign succeeded in securing direct dialogue between the LGBTIQ+ community and parliamentarians for the first time in Bhutan’s history. This milestone strengthened future advocacy efforts and paved the way for more inclusive policies. The first of two workshops organised by the campaign brought together LGBTIQ+ community members, representatives from the UN, and the National Commission for Women and Children. The second consultation brought together LGBTIQ+ members, parliamentarians, and government officials, including representatives from the Royal Court of Justice, the Office of the Attorney General, and the Cabinet Secretariat. Discussions focused on policy reforms and solutions outlined in the revised National Gender Equality Policy, with parliamentarians committing to supporting LGBTIQ+ equality through legislative measures. Dialogue with members of parliament on the National Gender Equality Policy, which sparked discussions about LGBTIQ+ human rights was a key achievement. Following these conversations, 81.3 per cent of participating parliamentarians expressed strong agreement that LGBTIQ+ rights are human rights, demonstrating a major shift in political discourse. The understanding of human rights of LGBTIQ+ people among policymakers increased by an average of 60 per cent, also signalling growing support for equality. Social stigma, discrimination, healthcare access, and legal inequalities were also issues discussed with policymakers. As a result of the awareness raising efforts, survey data showed a 12.5 per cent increase in policymakers recognizing social stigma as a serious issue and a 19per cent rise in awareness of systemic discrimination. Awareness of healthcare disparities affecting transgender individuals increased from 37.5per cent to 68.8per cent, while recognition of legal inequalities rose from 25per cent to 56.3 per cent. While there was some acknowledgment of policy progress, 37.5 per cent of policymakers still felt that existing laws do not adequately protect the human rights of LGBTIQ+ people, indicating the need for stronger legal frameworks. Policymakers also demonstrated improved comfort levels in discussing LGBTIQ+ issues in professional settings, with those feeling “very comfortable” increasing from 56.3 per cent to 75 per cent. Similarly, those who were “not comfortable at all” dropped from 12.4 per cent to 0 per cent, marking an important shift within political and institutional spaces. Free & Equal Bhutan also fostered a notable shift in attitudes toward transgender people. Support for equal opportunities in education, healthcare, and employment remained high, with 87.5 per cent of policymakers strongly agreeing. Resistance to transgender individuals working with children diminished, and the perception of transgender individuals as “immoral” saw a significant decrease, with 62.5 per cent of policymakers initially agreeing with the statement, but only 31.3 per cent maintaining this view post-training. Beyond shifting perceptions, the campaign also worked to amplify transgender voices and experiences. We produced and published a personal story about the life journey of Ugyen, a Bhutanese transgender woman and human rights defender, contributing to increased transgender visibility in the country. As she said: “ My country is small, but it has big dreams and ambitions. One day, everyone will be equal and happy,” she said. Read her story here: https://unf.pa/3VzjYnN Related Content News 12 May 2026 Bhutan takes Legal Awareness to the Grassroots Read story News 15 March 2026 Series of key events organized for International Women's Day 2026- "Rights, Justice, and Action for all Women and Girls" Read story Story 10 December 2024 Family Support is Key: Ugyen's Journey as a Transwoman in Bhutan Read story Pagination 1 2 3 Next Last » Back to page Publications Share on Share on UNFPA is the United Nations sexual and reproductive health agency. Our mission is to deliver a world where every pregnancy is wanted, every childbirth is safe and every young person's potential is fulfilled. Go beyond UNFPA Global Work with us Contact Us Media Centre Report wrongdoing Keep in touch Follow us on social media Subscribe to our newsletter Subscribe © All rights reserved. 2026 Terms of use | UNFPA Privacy Policy | Sitemap