Gabon criminalized homosexuality & two men have already been arrested - LGBTQ Nation Queerty : Culture Outsports : Sports GayCities : Travel LGBTQ Outpost : Shopping Login Become a Member Newsletter WhatsApp Facebook Instagram Twitter Threads Bluesky Menu Politics Good News Pride in Pictures Monthly Issue 🏳️‍🌈 100% LGBTQ+ Owned Politics Good News Pride in Pictures Monthly Issue Families Law & Policy Life Crime & Justice Arts & Media Commentary About Us Store Login Become a Member Part of the Q.Digital family of brands: Queerty GayCities INTO Outsports LGBTQ Outpost WhatsApp Facebook Instagram Twitter Threads Bluesky Crime & Justice Gabon criminalized homosexuality & two men have already been arrested Gabon never had a colonial law banning gay sex. Alex Bollinger (He/Him) December 13, 2019, 12:00 pm EST Share: Gabon's flag torn to show the rainbow flag | Shutterstock The central African nation of Gabon passed legislation to ban homosexuality, bringing the total number of countries that ban homosexuality back up to 70. Reuters reports that the new law in the majority Christian nation will punish “sexual relations between people of the same sex” with up to six months in prison and a fine of five million Central African francs (around $8500). Related: Gay man jailed in Cameroon for sending ‘I love you’ text to another man dies Gabon is a former French colony and it had no laws to punish homosexuality on the books when it got its independence in 1960. A government official told Reuters that the bill actually passed quietly in July. Davis Mac-Iyalla of the Interfaith Diversity Network of West Africa, a Ghanaian organization, said that he knows of two men in Gabon who have already been arrested under the law and had to bribe the police to be let go. “It has further sent the LGBT community underground and has created harassment,” Mac-Iyalla said. “The corrupt police now use that, arrest people and then people have to bribe their way out.” Earlier this year, Botswana and Angola legalized homosexuality, and last year India’s high court overturned their ban, bringing the number of countries that ban homosexuality down to 69. “Globally… we’re seeing polarizing tensions,” said Lucas Ramon Mendos of ILGA World, an LGBTQ organization. “Where things are getting better, there is a momentum for even more improvement, and where things are bad now we’re seeing things are worsening.” A veteran online reporter, Alex Bollinger has been covering LGBTQ+ news since the Bush administration. He's now the editor-in-chief of LGBTQ Nation. He has a Masters in Economic Theory and Econometrics from the Paris School of Economics. He lives in Montpellier. Connect with Alex Bollinger: See more: Crime & Justice , Africa , Botswana , India Related His allegedly homophobic boss at JPMorgan gave him panic attacks. So now he’s suing the company. Kyrsten Sinema’s ex-lover allegedly broke into her house & smashed over $200K worth of items “A vicious, unprovoked attack”: 2 men charged with brutal anti-gay beating of college student Help make LGBTQ Nation 1,500 Strong Independent LGBTQ+ journalism matters more than ever. This September, help us reach 1,500 members and keep LGBTQ+ stories, voices, and reporting available to millions of readers. $25 $50 $100 $150 Or give a different amount: $ $5/month $10/month $25/month $50/month $60/year $100/year $200/year $365/year We accept all major credit cards, Apple Pay, and Google Pay. 🏳️‍🌈 100% LGBTQ+ Owned ✔️ Always Free Journalism 🔒 Secure Payments ❌ Cancel Anytime Latest Law & Policy Blue-state hospitals are folding on trans youth care. Parents are wondering why they moved. In New York and other progressive states, providers are leaving transgender kids to fend for themselves. 4 minute read · 1790542800 Read Crime & Justice Trans woman & partner attacked by group of women driving by: “I want to know why.” The perpetrators pepper-sprayed the couple, and one yanked the trans woman by her hair. 2 minute read · 1790542800 Read Election News Texas Trump voters explain why they hate “morally corrupt” Ken Paxton: “People won’t vote for him” “Because [Republicans] picked him, they stand to lose the state.” 4 minute read · 1790535600 Read Commentary After 15 years in women’s prison, I realized I was a lesbian As I served a life sentence, I had given up on love. Then I met Paige. 10 minute read · 1790528400 Read Life Boebert’s not a lesbian, Republican warns about “furry pilots” & drag star speaks truth to power Here are the top stories of the week that you might have missed. 5 minute read · September 27, 2026 Read Life A lifetime on the margins & a manslaughter case full of questions Connor Schuyler fled anti-LGBTQ+ abuse as a child and survived homelessness, addiction and prison. Then he found himself in prison. 11 minute read · September 26, 2026 Read Life Hungarian gay couple trying to adopt for 5 years finally making headway under new government “We didn’t feel outright hostility, but when we first met social services it was clear they had an unspoken inclination.” 4 minute read · September 26, 2026 Read Commentary Don’t be fooled: The patriarchy is alive & fully functioning It’s so prevalent that it’s virtually invisible to some men and women alike. 8 minute read · September 26, 2026 Read Life “Legislation anxiety” is plaguing trans people nationwide There is “an environment of fear no matter where I go,” said one participant in a new study. 3 minute read · September 26, 2026 Read Life Anti-trans politician kicked out of public event after repeatedly misgendering his trans opponent PLUS: Dolly Parton’s encouraging advice and a drag king wants to be a castle’s witch! 3 minute read · September 26, 2026 Read Life Pete Hegseth is withholding pay from discharged trans soldiers. LGBTQ+ Dems are demanding answers. “This is unacceptable and appears to be another broken promise by this Administration.” 3 minute read · September 25, 2026 Read Politics “Disappointed and ashamed”: LGBTQ+ & ally groups slam Dem Rep. Marcy Kaptur’s anti-trans ads Democratic groups are urging her to change course. 5 minute read · September 25, 2026 Read Related See all Crime & Justice His allegedly homophobic boss at JPMorgan gave him panic attacks. So now he’s suing the company. He said the mistreatment caused him to start pulling his own hair out. 3 minute read · September 25, 2026 Read Crime & Justice Kyrsten Sinema’s ex-lover allegedly broke into her house & smashed over $200K worth of items And his ex-wife is suing Sinema for allegedly having an affair with him while he was still married. 2 minute read · September 24, 2026 Read Crime & Justice “A vicious, unprovoked attack”: 2 men charged with brutal anti-gay beating of college student They allegedly punched the victim in the head more than two dozen times. 2 minute read · September 24, 2026 Read Crime & Justice For lesbian victims of domestic violence, competent care is scarce Heteronormative assumptions about intimate-partner violence and cuts to research funding are contributing to a lack of resources for survivors. 10 minute read · September 23, 2026 Read Crime & Justice Three men were stabbed outside a gay bar. Police aren’t investigating it as a hate crime. One victim remains in stable condition at a local hospital. 3 minute read · September 22, 2026 Read Crime & Justice US deports man who was immediately charged for gay sex worker killing in his home country Guyanese authorities posted a wanted notice for him in 2019. The US sent him back this past Friday. 2 minute read · September 22, 2026 Read Crime & Justice She spouted anti-trans lies to oppose a rainbow crosswalk. Now she’s facing consequences. A flyer she handed out denounced the “transgender agenda” and said her small town’s children would be in danger. 3 minute read · September 20, 2026 Read Crime & Justice Minnesota man stabbed with broken bottle because attacker thought he was gay He was in a bar bathroom with a friend when the assailant started shouting homophobic slurs. 3 minute read · September 17, 2026 Read Crime & Justice Gay Black man says he was beaten by his ex & state prosecutors did nothing. Now he’s suing. His lawsuit says prosecutors took cases brought by white victims more seriously. 4 minute read · September 16, 2026 Read Crime & Justice “Look of hate”: He attacked 10 gay men before he was arrested. He’s going away for years. He picked gay victims to beat, strangle, and kick, but he claims he’s not homophobic. 4 minute read · September 16, 2026 Read Crime & Justice Charlie Kirk statue vandalized soon after being unveiled at Turning Point USA headquarters Turning Point USA called the vandalism “diabolical.” 2 minute read · September 14, 2026 Read Crime & Justice “Pain has no gender”: Baltimore mourns murder of trans woman Sophie Lee “Sophie deserved another birthday. Another laugh. Another chance to fall in love. She deserved to grow old.” 3 minute read · September 14, 2026 Read More Stories We're Talking About Politics Trailblazing journo Kara Swisher sounds alarm on MAGA billionaire buying CNN: “F these guys! I don’t want to work for them” Kara Swisher does *not* want to work for David Ellison at CNN. September 27, 2026 · Queerty Politics Alyssa Edwards reads Ken Paxton for filth after disgusting attack: “Texas is big enough for all of us” Mess with Alyssa Edwards, you’re going to get the horns. September 25, 2026 · Queerty Politics Is Peter Thiel breaking up with JD Vance? All good things must come to an end. September 25, 2026 · Queerty Politics “F THOSE B*TCHES”: Why queer voters aren’t canceling Mary Peltola over her NYT exposé Looking at the accusations against Mary Peltola. September 24, 2026 · Queerty Politics Melania praises life under communism while plugging the sequel to her -$65M box office bomb Melania Tr*mp dropped by Fox & Friends this week to discuss her mysterious new female “empowerment” venture, promote her upcoming docuseries nobody asked for, and wax nostalgic about how delightful it was to grow up in Eastern Europe under authoritarian rule. September 24, 2026 · Queerty Politics GOP lawmaker has wild 20-minute meltdown on Senate floor over “furry pilots” & trans people He’s got bigger problems than furries in flight September 24, 2026 · Queerty Politics Now even Republicans want answers on Don Jr.’s Russian ties after wedding scandal Could Don Jr.’s scandal finally bring down the whole empire? September 23, 2026 · Queerty Politics She promised to carry on Lindsey Graham’s legacy. Now her campaign is imploding. Cue the off alarm bells for Republicans! 🚨 🚨 🚨 This could be the Senate flip nobody saw coming! September 23, 2026 · Queerty Politics Influencer says he posed as a gay escort at RNC & takes us on a wild ride Nick Pringle knew that posing as a male escort at the RNC would be a dangerous assignment… September 23, 2026 · Queerty Politics State-run “Tr*mp TV” is already a disaster of humiliating proportions Well that was a flop! September 22, 2026 · Queerty Politics From hookup app to Capitol Hill: Why Grindr is hosting members of Congress Grindr played host to a surprising visitor. September 22, 2026 · Queerty Politics Somehow Don Jr.’s Russian wedding scandal just got 10 times worse He just keeps getting in deeper September 22, 2026 · Queerty Newsletter WhatsApp Facebook Instagram Twitter Threads Bluesky About Us Contact Us Privacy Policy AI Policy Terms of Service Privacy Notice for California Residents Monthly Issue © 2010 - 2026 LGBTQ Nation® | Proudly LGBTQ+ Owned and Operated 🏳️‍🌈 🏳️‍⚧️ LGBTQ Nation is a registered trademark of Q.Digital, Inc., registered in the state of California. $5/month $10/month $25/month $50/month $60/year $100/year $200/year $365/year We accept all major credit cards, Apple Pay, and Google Pay. 🏳️‍🌈 100% LGBTQ+ Owned ✔️ Always Free Journalism 🔒 Secure Payments ❌ Cancel Anytime