Transgender Europe applauds Malta for naming gender identity - MaltaToday.com.mt menu Toggle navigation Home Jobs in Malta Pharmacies Sponsored Announcements iGaming Offers Advertise Contact Digital Edition Support Services News National Court & Police Interview MaltaToday Survey Planning Xtra Budget 2026 Europe 2024 Election 2026 Court & Police Boat catches fire in Marsaskala Court & Police Motorcyclist, passenger hospitalised after Birgu crash National Moviment Graffitti calls for signatures against Pembroke sports complex National PN calls for national education conference after poor PISA results More in News Election 2026 Business Business News Business Comment Tech & Gaming Property Online Casinos Tech & Gaming Why operational coordination is becoming a competitive advantage in iGaming Business News MFSA and FinanceMalta launch Malta Finance Week 2027 Business News MFSA brings together international experts to examine the future of financial services at FinTech2030 Business News Central Bank of Malta Governor participates in ECOFIN meetings in Dublin More in Business Sports World Cup 2026 Football Rugby Motor Sports Boxing Tennis Other Sports Betting Motorsports Matthias Sultana takes on the Jerez Circuit Tennis Young Maltese athlete pursues tennis development in France Other Sports Micallef signs off GB3 in style at Donington Park Other Sports Giacomo Camilleri joins Spanish club BC Badajoz More in Sports Arts Art Books Entertainment Music Theatre & Dance Film Cultural Diary Lifestyle Books Schembri wins National Book Prize, calls for clerical abuse inquiry Art Malta-based photographer Angie Balzan wins international Spotlight Awards grand prize Cultural Diary My essentials: Carmen Busuttil’s cultural picks Theatre & Dance West end hit Everybody’s Talking About Jamie makes its Malta debut More in Arts Comment Opinions Editorial Letters Cartoons Law Report The Skinny Opinions Comfortably numb Editorial Johann Buttigieg has to go Opinions From individual talent to collective strength Opinions Protecting children, empowering families and Malta’s role More in Comment Video Archives Sponsored Magazines GourmetToday Architecture & Design Restaurants IBER&CO & CASA PEPA: Two ways to love Spain Restaurants Tapea: Where Spain comes alive in St Julian's Articles Premju Emanuele Luigi Galizia returns to celebrate Malta’s best in architecture Restaurants MasterChef Thailand’s Ian Kittichai brings his famous take on Thai cuisine to Valletta More in Magazines Digital Paper Digital Paper My Account Subscribe SMS Alerts Previous Editions home news Digital Paper National Court & Police Interview MaltaToday Survey Planning Xtra Budget 2026 Europe 2024 Election 2026 News National Transgender Europe applauds Malta for naming gender identity Malta with the first Constitution in Europe to name gender identity. 15 April 2014, 1:29pm by Miriam Dalli 2 min read Add as a preferred source on Google Malta has become the first European state to have gender identity in its constitution following the proposed amendment that was approved yesterday evening in parliament. The news has reached foreign shores and Transgender Europe (TGEU) was among the first NGOs to laud Malta for including gender identity as a protected ground in its highest legal text. On Monday evening, parliament also introduced civil unions giving same-sex and different-sex couples nearly the same rights as married couples. Transgender persons who have changed their legal gender are now also able to enter into a marriage. “These are fantastic news. It has been a long way for Malta, and we congratulate the activists who have fought over all the years for the recognition and protection of transgender people,” TGEU Executive Director Julia Ehrt said. According to TGEU policy officer Richard Köhler, the constitutional amendment is also a signal for other countries to uplift transgender identities out of the shadows of prejudice and misconception. “Countries must say loud and clear: we stand proudly by our transgender population. We need more trans champions like Malta,” Köhler said. The parliamentarians also strengthened the anti-discrimination law to better protect transgender persons against discrimination. A proposal for gender recognition procedures is currently under preparation, which, according to Maltese activists, will be modeled after the Argentinean Gender Identity Act. “We urge the Maltese lawmakers now to live up to the high expectations and come up with the best law possible. Transgender persons, who have been so long the odd ones, out deserve quick, transparent and accessible procedures to have their identities recognized.” Köhler added. Opposition MP Claudette Buttigieg, through a private member's bill, called for sexual orientation to be listed as a protected ground. The government went on to propose that gender identity should also be named in the constitution. All government and opposition MPs voted in favour of the words "sexual orientation" to be added to Article 32 and 45 of the Constitution, which list the fundamental rights and freedoms of individuals which are protected by the state. The Opposition however abstained on the civil unions’ bill because of the reservations it had on gay adoptions. Miriam Dalli joined MaltaToday.com.mt in 2010 becoming assistant editor f... More from Miriam Dalli About Us Advertise Contact Digital Edition Support Services Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy Cookie Policy Archives MediaToday is an independent media house based in Malta. Copyright © MediaToday Co. Ltd, Vjal ir-Rihan, San Gwann SGN 9016, Malta, Europe Reproduction of material from this website without written permission is strictly prohibited. By using this site, you agree to our Privacy Policy including the use of cookies to enhance your experience.