Transgender prisoners challenge prison authorities | GroundUp Skip to main content location republish phone mail print search twitter facebook rss youtube copyright menu cross whatsapp share home creative-commons instagram tiktok bluesky News Videos Sections ▼ Features Opinion Editorials Photo Essays Court Cases Guides ▼ Social Grants Housing Q&A More ▼ About Us Gallery Corrections Topics Authors Target Sudoku Donate Search Home News Transgender prisoners challenge prison authorities Transgender prisoners challenge prison authorities Correctional Services has developed a standard operating procedure for transgender prisoners, but rights organisations are concerned about implementation 6 August 2025 | By Elna Schütz News | South Africa Share Add GroundUp on Google Correctional Services has developed a standard operating procedure for transgender prisoners, but how well is it implemented? Illustration: Lisa Nelson Lawyers for Human Rights is representing a prisoner with the initials NM, a transgender woman serving a long-term sentence in Johannesburg Correctional Centre, who has taken the Department of Correctional Services to court. For over five years, NM has been requesting gender-affirming healthcare, such as hormone treatment, recommended by Department of Correctional Services (DCS) psychiatrists. She has now approached the Gauteng High Court and the Equality Court to get an order directing the prison authorities to provide this as primary health care. Her situation is similar to that of Jade September , a transgender woman imprisoned in the male section of Pollsmoor, who won her 2019 case in the Equality Court against the Minister of Correctional Services and others. The Equality Court ruled that not allowing September to express her gender identity was unfair discrimination. Standard operating procedures The judge gave correctional services several options for reasonably accommodating September within two months and ordered DCS to introduce transgender sensitivity training for all employees within a year. This included putting standard operating procedures (SOPs) in place for LGBT+ prisoners. The SOP outlines how prisoners should be admitted, including an assessment of the safety risk they may face, which needs to be completed in the first six hours. The SOP explains how searches and body cavity searches are to be conducted respectfully on LGBT+ prisoners. It also states that transgender men and transgender women should be detained or transported only with other transgender men or transgender women respectively. The document also describes how LGBT+ prisoners should be communicated with. For instance, staff are strongly encouraged not to assume someone’s gender identity and to respect it once clear. Alleged problems with implementation Sanja Bornman, an independent gender law and policy specialist who represented September at the time of the case for LHR, says that the way prisoners were treated improved significantly after the court order. But the effects were not far-reaching or long-term. “Over time, it became clear that officials held the mistaken belief that the order only applied to Ms September, and not all transgender inmates,” Bornman says. “Even the improved treatment of Ms September was not fully sustained.” Bornman notes that legal interventions on behalf of transgender prisoners were needed several times after the judgment. For instance, LHR had to write to the correctional service facility repeatedly to remind officials to uphold the order and to extend accommodations to all transgender prisoners. Belinda Qaqamba Makinana, legal and health programmes manager at Gender Dynamix, which acted as a friend of the court in the September case, says that the harassment frequently comes from DCS staff not other prisoners. “We know that besides these two cases, there are many other transgender women in various prisons in South Africa who still face violence,” says Makinana. Gender Dynamix was involved in the process of developing the SOP. Makinana said the SOP is often not implemented as it should be. “I think definitely there needs to be more sensitisation work within prisons to be a safer space, and South Africa must perhaps take a bolder step in terms of the ways in which they want to accommodate transgender people.” DCS spokesperson Singabakho Nxumalo confirmed that it is a disciplinary offence for a prison official to discriminate against a prisoner on the basis of their gender or sexuality, or to display disrespect. “DCS continues to sensitise its officials around protecting and securing human rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex inmates,” he said. A report last year by the Commission for Gender Equality states that while SOP around LGBTQIA+ prisoners is in place and was developed with care, its implementation remains concerning. Support independent journalism Donate using Payfast TOPICS: Human Rights LGBTI Prisons Don't miss out on the latest news We respect your privacy, and promise we won't spam you. Email address Subscribe Now Next: In photos: Rare birds at the Joburg Zoo Previous: Board of Deputies conflates Judaism and Zionism Write a letter in response to this article © 2025 GroundUp. This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License . You may republish this article, so long as you credit the authors and GroundUp, and do not change the text. Please include a link back to the original article. We put an invisible pixel in the article so that we can count traffic to republishers. All analytics tools are solely on our servers. We do not give our logs to any third party. Logs are deleted after two weeks. We do not use any IP address identifying information except to count regional traffic. We are solely interested in counting hits, not tracking users. If you republish, please do not delete the invisible pixel. Most popular Peach farmers offered cash to end Tulbagh cannery contracts Hundreds march through Cape Town against planned N2 wall SASSA: Long queues, broken toilets and no service after lunchtime Cape Town roads blocked in electricity protest Meet the man who fills in potholes in Khayelitsha every afternoon Most time spent reading My two-hour “detention” while reporting on water challenges in Bronkhorstspruit Enable Through Dance: breaking barriers for dancers with disabilities Local companies to be asked to make foot-and-mouth disease vaccines Police torture case postponed for 11th time Test more people to reduce TB deaths, study finds Our answers to your questions Can my landlord cut the electricity if I haven't paid my rent? Is it fair for a general worker to earn less than R30 an hour? Do I qualify for a rent-to-own house if I earn R5,500 per month? Can an employer withhold pay if you are ill and have exhausted the sick and annual leave? How do I dissolve my two customary marriages before I get into a civil marriage with my new partner? You might like Meet the man who fills in potholes in Khayelitsha every afternoon 2026-09-25 SIU asked to investigate farm worker equity schemes 2026-09-25 SA may reach its emissions targets, but are they too easy? 2026-09-25 Copyright © 2012-2026 GroundUp. See copyright notice on articles for terms. GroundUp is a member of the Press Council and strives to abide by the Press Code . Useful links About Privacy Sign up for our weekly newsletter RSS feeds Follow us on Google News Follow us on TikTok Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Bluesky Follow us on Instagram Subscribe to our Youtube channel Join our WhatsApp channel Contact us Please email, do not phone, with story pitches and questions. [email protected] +27 (0) 21 788 9163 Address: 2nd Floor, Ridge House Belmont Office Park Bridge Road Rondebosch 7700