Abominable Act In Ekpoma Community: 2 Male Gay Lovers Caught Making Love, One Lynched To Death, Other Escaped – The Nigerian Observer HOME NEWS INSIDE EDO POLITICS JUDICIARY EDUCATION WORLD NEWS RELIGION HEALTH AGRICULTURE CRIME ENVIRONMENT SOUTH-SOUTH TECH SPORTS OPINIONS EDITORIAL ENTERTAINMENT LIFE & LOVE LIFESTYLE SHOWBIZ FASHION BUSINESS SECURITY E-EDITIONS Search Latest News Idahosa Highlights Power of Thanksgiving at Methodist Harvest • EDSG In Talks With Chinese Investors To Establish A Drug Manufacturing Company • Okaeben Challenge Security Agencies To Restore Order At The City Center • Edo Special Court To Deliver First Verdict in Kidnapping Case on September 29 • Okpebholo Promises N100m Grant to Uwelu Spare Parts Traders, Road Reconstruction • Why Sportswear Manufacturers Partner with Professional Teams • Ahead AFCON tie against Madagascar, new NFF scribe, Ikpeme charges eagles for victory in Uyo • Daurama FC begin training ahead of NNL 2026/27 season • Joshua vs Fury confirmed for December 11 in Cardiff • NFF to celebrate Moses Simon, the Trojan, as he becomes a centurion • HOME E-EDITIONS NEWS INSIDE EDO CRIME SECURITY JUDICIARY EDUCATION WORLD NEWS RELIGION BUSINESS POLITICS HEALTH SPORTS OPINIONS EDITORIAL ENTERTAINMENT Home | Abominable Act In Ekpoma Community: 2 Male Gay Lovers Caught Making Love, One Lynched To Death, Other Escaped Abominable Act In Ekpoma Community: 2 Male Gay Lovers Caught Making Love, One Lynched To Death, Other Escaped By Observer May 24, 2018 …whereabout Unknown, Wanted By Police & Community. By JUDE EHEBHA EKPOMA – The nefarious and illicit act legally outlawed and classified as tabulous, and capable of defying the traditional laws and heritage of the land has taking place in Ekpoma Community. You May Have Missed Okpebholo Promises N100m Grant to Uwelu Spare Parts Traders, Road Reconstruction Tinubu orders emergency rescue of Benin-Asaba Road Edo Govt assures refund of pension contributions to DBS pensioners Okpebholo assures speedy operationalisation of 83 Division in Edo Idahosa Highlights Power of Thanksgiving at Methodist Harvest The abominable and forbidden act was committed by two male young men in their late twenties. The culprits are one Ambrose Frank Eromosele, a restaurant operator graduate of Ambrose Alli University (AAU), Ekpoma and Peter Osagie, an artisan in the area. According to our Edo Central correspondent, Jude Ehebha, the burble busted recently, when the gay lovers were caught red handed making love in Ambrose Eromosele’s room by some of his neighbors in the same house at No 8, Abia Iruekpen Road, Ekpoma. A Very reliable anonymous source, who wouldn’t want his identity exposed for fear of victimization that narrated the whole story to our correspondent said the gay relationship between the duo has been on for quite a while. But on that fateful day, December 12, 2017, unknowingly to them that some neighbors in the same house who have been suspecting them, monitored and bursted the closed door to meet both of them in the sexual act at about 11:40pm. In the process, there was a serious fisticuff and in the ensuing melee, Ambrose Frank Eromosele got the slightest opportunity to escape through the back exit door into the bush behind the house, as violent concentration was on his partner Peter Osagie, who could not escape. You May Have Missed Okpebholo Promises N100m Grant to Uwelu Spare Parts Traders, Road Reconstruction Tinubu orders emergency rescue of Benin-Asaba Road Edo Govt assures refund of pension contributions to DBS pensioners Okpebholo assures speedy operationalisation of 83 Division in Edo Idahosa Highlights Power of Thanksgiving at Methodist Harvest Thereafter, the neighbors, raised a loud alarm which immediately attracted the community to the scene. They swooped on Peter Osagie, tortured, beat him mercilessly and later lynched him by setting him ablaze with burnt tyres to death. When the angry mobs could not lay their hands on the key actor Ambrose and knowing fully well that he operates a restaurant, known as “Man Must Chop Restaurant” at No 32 Ihumudumu Road in the area, they then moved straight there to vandalize and totally destroyed the place beyond recognition, before the arrival of the police. When the police got to the scene, they immediately swung into action in search of the fleeing Ambrose Eromosele ransacking everywhere. When cornered, a very close cousin of Ambrose, simply known as Happiness Okhale, Who also claimed anonymity lamented the fate of his cousin Ambrose who has not been seen since then and more worrisome is the fate of his only five year old son, Stefan Eromosele, who he got from an accidental pregnancy with his old girlfriend before veering into gay relationship. Moreover, it was also reliably gathered that the Ekpoma Community elders, native doctors, cult groups and angry youths are also desperately in search of Ambrose Frank Eromosele dead or alive for daring to defy the traditional laws of the land. Which is capable of bringing calamity to the land, if not found and used as sacrificial lamb to the ancestral shrine, according to the custom. It will be recalled that the two highest policy making bodies in the country, Houses of Senate and Representatives have since legislated against gay relationship during the regime of President Goodluck Ebele Jonathan and signed into law. All effort for the then American President, Barrack Obama to persuade and impress it on Nigeria failed, simply because the people and the two major religious bodies, Christian and Muslim also rejected it outrightly. Even virtually all communities in the country North, East, West, and South, like Ekpoma totally forbids it, before it was formally and officially outlawed by the federal government. And if caught in the act, traditionally, the person (s) is outrightly liable to the traditional punishment of death, while the punishment by law is life imprisonment or death, depending on the gravity. A verified source, though revealed that Ambrose was sighted hiding in his church Reverend Father’s house, but was denied, as the clergy man, when contacted said that he only attended service there as usual. As at press time, the where about of Ambrose Eromosele is still unknown, since that fateful day of the incident. But some of his church members have secretly told our correspondent upon interview that the threat on Ambrose’ life from all angles is too much to the extent that he can’t escape, nor survive it at all. However, when contacted, the Divisional Police Officer of Ekpoma police Division, Superintendent (SP) Lukeman Otubu confirmed the story. Saying the Police have since stretched its dragnet and are seriously on the trail of the escapee gay lover, Ambrose Frank Eromosele and has been officially declared wanted with a handsome reward of N5m (Five million naira) for any successful informant that can lead to his arrest. Ambrose Frank Eromosele was described as not too light in complexion, bearded and bushy hair. About 5 feet 10 inches tall, fairly robust shape with a tattooed left hand. A show talker, speaks Esan and English Languages fluently. Meanwhile the charred body of the lynched and burnt partner Peter Osagie has since been buried. Latest Digital Edition Click to Get a Copy LATEST NEWS Idahosa Highlights Power of Thanksgiving at Methodist Harvest By BERNADETTE IDALU September 27, 2026 EDSG In Talks With Chinese Investors To Establish A Drug Manufacturing Company By RICHARD EWEKA September 27, 2026 Okaeben Challenge Security Agencies To Restore Order At The City Center By Richard Eweka September 27, 2026 Latest News Idahosa Highlights Power of Thanksgiving at Methodist Harvest EDSG In Talks With Chinese Investors To Establish A Drug Manufacturing Company Okaeben Challenge Security Agencies To Restore Order At The City Center Edo Special Court To Deliver First Verdict in Kidnapping Case on September 29 Okpebholo Promises N100m Grant to Uwelu Spare Parts Traders, Road Reconstruction Why Sportswear Manufacturers Partner with Professional Teams Ahead AFCON tie against Madagascar, new NFF scribe, Ikpeme charges eagles for victory in Uyo Daurama FC begin training ahead of NNL 2026/27 season Joshua vs Fury confirmed for December 11 in Cardiff NFF to celebrate Moses Simon, the Trojan, as he becomes a centurion Basketball: Rivers Hoopers edge Maktown Flyers in overtime to seal NPBL crown AFCON 2027 Qualifier: CAF makes late change to match official POLITICS Okpebholo Promises N100m Grant to Uwelu Spare Parts Traders, Road Reconstruction September 27, 2026 at 08:21 PM OBSERVER CARTOON Sustaining the Crackdown on Edo’s Revenue Predators August 11, 2025 at 10:05 AM The Nigerian Observer is a daily newspaper published in Benin City, Edo State, Nigeria, since 1968 by the Bendel Newspapers Company Limited (BNCL) and is owned by the Edo State Government 24 Airport Road, Benin City, Edo State, Nigeria. +2348164659374 [email protected] About Links NEWS POLITICS SPORTS OPINIONS HEALTH Useful Links HOME ABOUT US Advertising Newsletter Enter your email to subscribe to our newsletter for the latest news. Let’s stay updated! Subscribe Latest News Idahosa Highlights Power of Thanksgiving at Methodist Harvest EDSG In Talks With Chinese Investors To Establish A Drug Manufacturing Company Okaeben Challenge Security Agencies To Restore Order At The City Center Edo Special Court To Deliver First Verdict in Kidnapping Case on September 29 Okpebholo Promises N100m Grant to Uwelu Spare Parts Traders, Road Reconstruction © 2026 The Nigerian Observer – All Right Reserved. Get Top Stories Subscribe to our newsletter Subscribe Close