Rainbow communities need protecting – and police are failing them | The Spinoff Support The Spinoff Kia ora The Spinoff The Spinoff Rainbow community and allies protest Posie Parker’s event in Auckland in 2023 (Photo: Anna Rawhiti-Connell) OPINION Society July 2, 2024 Rainbow communities need protecting – and police are failing them Jennifer Shields Guest writer Share Story × Share Story Facebook Twitter Bluesky Reddit Email Linkedin Whatsapp Messenger × Share Story Facebook Twitter Bluesky Reddit Email Linkedin Whatsapp Messenger Share Story × Share Story Facebook Twitter Bluesky Reddit Email Linkedin Whatsapp Messenger Rainbow community and allies protest Posie Parker’s event in Auckland in 2023 (Photo: Anna Rawhiti-Connell) After a spate of rainbow event cancellations, Jennifer Shields asks for a little more security for her communities. It’s been a rough few years for rainbow communities across Aotearoa – we’re now 10 years on from the “transgender tipping point” of May 2014, when Time magazine , with Laverne Cox on its cover, declared a paradigm shift in the inclusion and acceptance of trans people in society. As many trans people detailed on the anniversary of the “tipping point” cover, it feels like if we’ve tipped any way, it’s backwards. We’ve seen our fair share of this paradigm shift here in Aotearoa, too. Despite some important wins – the Births, Deaths, Marriages and Relationships Registration Act 2021 allowing easier access to correct identification; the Conversion Practices Prohibition Act 2022 outlawing attempts to change someone’s sexuality or gender identity; and the hard work of many advocates in Aotearoa creating significant shifts in areas like healthcare and education that have tangibly improved things for our rainbow whānau – we’re also seeing things get harder. The safety of our communities is more and more on my mind lately, as I watch far right supremacists crash libraries, community events get cancelled because of threats, and religious leaders preach “time to kill” in totally normal, absolutely rhetorical ways that surely no one could take seriously, right? There’s been a growing pattern of this behaviour over the last three years in particular. In June 2022, Gloria of Greymouth, the most gorgeous church you’ll ever see, a bright pink beacon of inclusion, was vandalised with homophobic and anti-semitic slurs . Just a week later, in Tauranga, a community building used by RainbowYOUTH and Gender Dynamix was burnt down, and later ruled an arson . A year later, anti-transgender activist Kellie-Jay Keen-Minshull visited Aotearoa, and in the weeks following anti-transgender rhetoric reached “unprecedented” levels . Weeks later, in my home town, a women’s swimming event at a community pool required a significant police response when a known far-right actor made a tangible threat of violence towards transgender people who had been coming along. The pattern has continued, and escalated. In March this year, two events featuring transgender artist Sophie Labelle in Hamilton and Christchurch were “stormed” by protesters affiliated with white supremacist group Action Zealandia. In May, Destiny Church, after successfully cancelling a string of rainbow events and defacing rainbow crossings around the country, advertised a sermon with the tagline “time to kill” and an image of David carrying Goliath’s severed head. The next day, Brian Tamaki took credit for the defacing of Gisborne’s rainbow crossing . Days after, Tamaki took to the stage alongside a number of anti-transgender speakers – including a sitting MP – in which he made the “time to kill” analogy explicit, comparing trans people to Goliath. And, just last week, an Upper Hutt drag king storytime was cancelled when Tamaki warned “if the Mayor and his councillors do not shut this event down, I have instructed our Destiny Church members and ManUp men to shut it down.” All of this has a significant impact on our communities and their wellbeing. We know that our communities are seeing hugely negative comments in the media and online, in many cases on a daily basis, because it’s so hard to get away from. Many of us working to further the wellbeing of trans people in Aotearoa have had to take significant steps to protect our own safety – removing our names from electoral rolls, ensuring workplaces are registered as priority locations with police call centres, and investing in security cameras. Brian Tamaki in Wellington (Photo by Lynn Grieveson/Getty Images) Through all of this, we’ve been meeting with police to better understand what we can do to keep ourselves safe, and what they’re doing to keep our communities safe. Despite assurances to “let us know if there’s anything we can do,” my questions about how police respond – or don’t – to threats at community events were sent to the OIA department. When I got responses, they were disappointing. I asked about the numbers of officers deployed to rainbow community events at Tūranga, Christchurch’s central library. There was one officer deployed when Action Zealandia stormed the library, four the week following when Destiny Church protested a drag storytime. I was curious about the decision-making processes that led to these numbers, when the Schools Strike for Climate March that ended in a peaceful occupation of Christchurch City Council drew 18 uniformed and gloved officers. All but one email was withheld under section 6(c) of the OIA, as “the release of information would be likely to prejudice the maintenance of law”. I also asked about a cancelled storytime in Rotorua, where council weren’t able to “secure additional policing” according to an internal review. The response I got was one page: due to short timeframes and “other operational matters”, the situation “created some resourcing challenges”. More Reading It’s this lack of consistent and appropriate police response when our community events draw threats that make it hard for organisers to keep them running. If you can’t rely on police to turn up when literal neo-Nazis storm your event, it’s difficult to ensure your attendees and performers are safe. The question I keep coming back to is this: how are we allowing this to keep happening? How is it that a church can simply force events to close by threatening to “shut it down” without repercussions? When will we see action from this government on this group preaching “time to kill”? Will it only be when one of Tamaki’s followers takes his words literally, as he knows they will? That’s the worry that I – and many other community members – have. I’ve sat across tables with members of my community here in Ōtautahi, people who are also members of the Muslim community, who see the same pattern they saw in the leadup to the attack on March 15th. And the same lack of response from those who ostensibly keep us safe. I’ve been out for 10 years now and have had a pretty lucky and privileged time – this is the most I’ve been concerned for my own personal safety in all that time, and the most worried I’ve been for my communities in the past decade. I don’t want to wait until the worst happens before we see a response. Our communities are in need of protection now . POPULAR Pledge cards and ‘bullshit’: National and Labour officially launch their campaigns Both major parties launched their campaigns in Auckland on Sunday. National had “no new taxes” and a pledge card; Labour had a cost-of-living pitch and a new student loan policy. By Henry Oliver | 28th September, 2026 Bulletin editor Field notes from National and Labour’s campaign launches The two major parties kicked off their campaigns in Auckland on Sunday. Joel MacManus attended both events. By Joel MacManus | 28th September, 2026 Senior writer Opinion New Zealand doesn’t need its own version of Monopoly. We’re living in one The game was meant to illustrate the problem with land speculation. We could just look at our entire economy instead. By Hayden Donnell | 28th September, 2026 Senior writer Love, actually, at 43: ‘Our relationship got even stronger after I transitioned’ 'I've spent a long time working on being better at recognising when I'm burning out and asking for help.' By Love actually | 27th September, 2026 Guest writer Saying goodbye to a loved one from a ringside seat The journey of a care-griever, balancing end-of-life care and grief. By Kate Langdon | 27th September, 2026 Guest writer Haunting Barbadoes Street: John Summers’ lost Christchurch 'My mother believed that every part of the city was dangerous after dark, but most of all she said this about Barbadoes Street.' By John Summers | 27th September, 2026 Contributing writer Where to eat in North East Valley and North Dunedin – an insider’s guide The best bento, bagels, butchers and more in this corner of Dunedin By Charlotte Muru-Lanning | 26th September, 2026 Contributing writer The New Zealand bush is the real star of Brad Pitt’s new movie The Hollywood star takes one hell of beating in the South Island-shot Heart of the Beast. By Chris Schulz | 26th September, 2026 Guest writer When a wild animal becomes your neighbour As the Catlins celebrate 20 years since sea lion pups returned to its shores, locals reflect on living next to, and sometimes with, endangered mammals. By Nina Brown | 26th September, 2026 Guest writer The Bulletin Weekdays 7am The Spinoff's morning wrap of NZ news. Create a free account to manage my subscriptions. + Subscribe The Daily Weekdays 5pm Everything published on The Spinoff that day. Create a free account to manage my subscriptions. + Subscribe The Weekend Saturday The best of The Spinoff each Saturday. Create a free account to manage my subscriptions. + Subscribe Society Help Me Hera: I am not your clown Why do women only want someone who can make them laugh? By Hera Lindsay Bird | 24th September, 2026 Contributing writer Dating Files: A 29-year-old who has ‘only dated men in the past but open to dating women’ 'Ideally no kids but starting to wonder if this is unreasonable as I get older!' By Dating Files | 23rd September, 2026 The cost of being: A ‘stingy’ 20-something who just bought their first home 'This has been my main financial goal since I first started working at 15.' By The Cost of Being | 22nd September, 2026 Love, actually, at 25: ‘We actually only just recently started to have sex’ 'She was a virgin and wanted to be sure we were in this for the long run before committing.' By Love actually | 20th September, 2026 I was a door-to-door salesman for a ‘devilcorp’ Our doorstep pitch gave the impression that buying a pin would support the cause, but it wasn’t clear to me where any of the money went. By Ben Fagan | 19th September, 2026 Sections Video Kai Internet Partners Science Society Books Sports Media Business About Contact About us Use of Generative AI Advertise Jobs Members Donate Members terms Subscribe Newsletters FOLLOW US DOWNLOAD THE APP Privacy Policy The Spinoff Members Terms and Conditions The Spinoff Advertising Terms and Conditions The Spinoff is subject to NZ Media Council procedures. A complaint must first be directed in writing, within one month of publication, via our contact page . If not satisfied with the response, the complaint may be referred to the online complaint form at www.presscouncil.org.nz along with a link to the relevant story and all correspondence with the publication. © The Spinoff 2026 × ▼ Loading...