Applying to change one's gender status and first name(s) in the civil register - Guichet.lu - Luxembourg Go to main menu Go to main menu Go to content Guichet.lu - Citizen Changer d'espace - Menu citizens actif Citizens Businesses Français Deutsch English Search Search site Search Log in Menu main Guichet.lu - Citizen Citizens Procedures by theme Procedures by theme Citizenship Family & Education Financial aid Health & Social security Housing & Construction Immigration Inclusion Justice Leisure Taxation Transport Work News Life events Help Contact Settings Guichet.lu - Citizen Citizens Businesses Log in Français Deutsch English Procedures by theme Citizenship Identity card, Passport, Criminal record, Nationality Family & Education Family allowance, Marriage, Training, Schooling, AideFi Financial aid Family, Housing, Transport, Health, Leisure, Work Health & Social security Health insurance, Medical expenses, Home care Housing & Construction Aid, Buying, Construction, Renting & Letting, Renovation Immigration Residence documents, International protection, Moving to Luxembourg Inclusion Citizenship, Family & Education, Health, Housing & Construction, Taxation, Transport, Work Justice Leisure Fishing, Tourism, Culture, Hunting, Sporting activities Taxation Tax return, Adjustment, Deduction, Inheritance, Donation Transport Driving licence, Registration, Adapto, Public transport Work Employment contracts, Leave, Pension, Unemployment News Life events Search site Search Help Contact Change Home Justice Surname, First name & Gender Change Applying to change one's gender status and first name(s) in the civil register Requesting a change of surname and/or first name(s) Partage Share by email Share on Facebook Share on LinkedIn Listen Applying to change one's gender status and first name(s) in the civil register Last update 29.09.2025 Demande de modification de la mention du sexe et du/des prénom(s) à l’état civil Go to online services and forms Any Luxembourg or foreign national, be they an adult or a minor, may apply to have their gender status changed in Luxembourg's civil register. At the same time, they may also apply to have one or several of their first names changed. These applications must be filed with the Ministry of Justice . Applicants who wish to have only their first name(s) changed without having their gender status changed must file an application with the Ministry of Justice . Who is concerned The option to change one's gender status is open to all adults and minors , provided they satisfy certain conditions. Specifically, this option is open to: Luxembourg nationals ; or foreign nationals , provided that their usual place of residence is in Luxembourg and that they lawfully reside there; or persons who have refugee , subsidiary protection or stateless status . Prerequisites The following persons must have had their usual place of residence and have been lawfully residing in Luxembourg for at least 12 consecutive months immediately prior to their application: any person of legal age who is a foreign national and has refugee , or subsidiary protection or stateless status; non-Luxembourg nationals who have parental authority or are the legal guardians of any minor who is a foreign national and who has refugee , or subsidiary protection or stateless status. The fact that the applicant has not undergone medical treatment, surgery or sterilisation is not a valid reason for denying the application. Costs The procedure to have one's gender status or first name(s) changed is free of charge . How to proceed Submitting the application The request can be made: in writing to the Minister of Justice , either in person or through a lawyer ; or online through My Guichet.lu , with authentication using a LuxTrust product or an electronic identity card ( eID ). How do I create my private eSpace on MyGuichet.lu? There are 2 possible scenarios: You have never used MyGuichet.lu before. You must: first register on MyGuichet.lu; and then create your private eSpace. You already have a business eSpace on MyGuichet.lu. You can directly create your private eSpace without having to register again. Further information as well as tutorials in relation with the private eSpace are available in our dedicated help page . This online service is also available in the MyGuichet.lu app. If you have linked your mobile device to your MyGuichet.lu account , you can also use it from your smartphone or tablet. The forms and links to the online procedure are available in the 'Online services and forms' section. Adults Applications to have one's gender status and first name(s) changed must be filed with: the Minister of Justice , if the applicant has reached the age of majority and is legally capable , be they Luxembourg or foreign nationals; the competent district court , if the applicant has reached the age of majority and has been placed under guardianship or curatorship . Adults who have already obtained a change in gender status and change in one or several of their first names may file a new application for a change in gender status and also to have one or more of their first names changed to conform with the change in gender status (e.g. John > Jane). In that case, the application must be filed with the competent district court. Minors Applications for minors, be they Luxembourg or foreign nationals , must be filed with: the Ministry of Justice , if the minor is at least 5 years of age ; the competent district court , if the minor is under the age of 5 . The application must indicate that the persons with parental authority over the minor, or the minor's legal representative, have given their consent to the change. Specificities regarding the online application by 2 parents who jointly exercise parental authority over their child: For this online procedure via My Guichet.lu, both parents must sign the application . This signature must be made using: a LuxTrust product ; or an electronic identity card ( eID ). In practice, the parent who initiates the procedure signs it and then sends it to the other parent for signature. If the second parent is unable to sign the application electronically, the application must be: downloaded; signed by the second parent; attached to the online application as a supporting document. In the event of disagreement between the minor and the persons with parental authority over them, or between the minor and their legal representative, the first parent to take action may file an application with the competent district court , which will rule in the child's best interest. The minor, along with the persons with parental authority over them, or the minor's legal representative, must go in together in person with their national identity card or passport. If the child is at least 12 years of age , the child must also give their consent to the requested change in gender status and first name(s) at the time of presentation at the Ministry of Justice. For minors who are at least 5 years of age , sufficient evidence must be presented to show that the gender status currently recorded in the civil register does not reflect their gender identity. Such evidence may include: the fact that the minor's gender expression matches the gender being applied for; the fact that the minor is identified by their family, friends and acquaintances as the gender being applied for; the fact that the minor has previously obtained a change in first name to match the gender being applied for. Supporting documents Adults Free and informed consent The applicant must submit an application stating that they have given their free and informed consent , along with all of the required particulars ( Form A may be used for this purpose – see 'Online services and forms'). The following wording must be reproduced in the application: ' la personne concernée déclare consentir librement et être consciente des modifications enregistrées à l’état civil au cas où la demande est avisée positivement par le ministre de la Justice ' (the person concerned declares that they freely consent to and are aware of the changes that will be recorded in the civil register if the application is approved by the Minister of Justice). ' Ces modifications concernent donc le changement du sexe et du/des prénom(s) sur tous les documents à l’état civil et les documents publics ' (Said changes pertain to the gender status and first name(s) that will appear in all civil-register and public documents). Evidence in support of the application The applicant must demonstrate, by producing sufficient evidence , that the gender status currently recorded in the civil register does not reflect their gender identity. Such evidence may include: the fact that the person's gender expression matches the gender being applied for; the fact that the person is identified by their family, friends and professional or other personal entourage as the gender being applied for; the fact that the person has previously obtained a change in first name to match the gender being applied for. Documents that may be submitted as evidence include, for example: written statements by persons who may or may not be related to the applicant, or by the applicant's employer(s) ( Form F may be used for this purpose – see 'Online services and forms'). These include written statements by a public body, a voluntary support organisation, or close relatives or friends, asserting that the person concerned identifies and is identified as the gender being applied for. A copy of the ID card or passport of each person providing such a supporting statement must be submitted to the Ministry of Justice; any other document or certificate. Extract from the criminal record If the applicant is a Luxembourg national , they must provide an extract from the Luxembourg criminal record (record no. 3) issued fewer than 30 days before the application is submitted. If the applicant is not a national of a EU Member State , they must provide: an extract from the Luxembourg criminal record (record no. 3) issued fewer than 30 days before the application is submitted; and the extracts from the foreign criminal records (or similar documents) issued by the relevant authorities of the foreign country or countries in which they are or were a citizen and the foreign country or countries where they have resided since the age of 18 over the course of the 15 years immediately preceding the submission of the application. EU nationals must provide an extract from the national criminal record issued fewer than 30 days before the application is submitted. Other supporting documents Applicants must also submit: a full copy of their birth certificate (rather than merely an extract) issued within the last 3 months; a copy of their valid passport or a copy of their valid national identity card ; a certificate issued by the competent authority proving that the applicant is not under guardianship or curatorship (the competent authority is the Civil Register ( Service du répertoire civil ) for orders issued in Luxembourg); To obtain that certificate, the following documents must be sent to the Civil Register by email or post: a residence certificate; a copy of the national identification number ( matricule ); a copy of the applicant's national identity card or passport, if the applicant resides in the European Union. If the person concerned is married or in a civil partnership , they must inform their spouse or partner of their intention to request a change of gender. This information must be served in advance by a bailiff. Minors The persons who have parental authority over the minor, or the minor's legal representative, must submit the required documents to the Minister of Justice. In addition, they have to present a signed application that: states their approval , accompanied by any evidence in support the application; specifically states the first name(s) requested. Evidence in support of the application Sufficient evidence must be presented to show that the gender status currently recorded in the civil register does not reflect the person's gender identity. Such evidence may include: the fact that the person's public gender expression matches the gender being applied for; the fact that the person is is known by the gender they identify with among their family, friends, schoolmates, work colleagues or members of associations; the fact that the person has previously obtained a change of their first name to match the gender being applied for. Documents that the persons with parental authority over the minor, or the minor's legal representative, must provide as evidence may include the following: written statements by persons who may or may not be related to the applicant, or by the applicant's employer(s) ( Form F may be used for this purpose – see 'Online services and forms'). These include written statements by a public body, a voluntary support organisation, or close relatives or friends, asserting that the person concerned identifies and is identified as the gender being applied for. A copy of the ID card or passport of each person providing such a supporting statement must be submitted to the Ministry of Justice; any other document or certificate. Extract from the criminal record of holders of parental authority or legal representatives If the persons with parental authority over the minor, or the minor's legal representative, are Luxembourg nationals , they must provide an extract from their Luxembourg criminal record, issued fewer than 30 days before the application is submitted. If the persons with parental authority over the minor, or the minor's legal representative, are EU nationals , they must provide an extract from their national criminal record issued fewer than 30 days before the application is submitted. If the persons with parental authority over the minor, or the minor's legal representative, are nationals of a non-EU Member State , they must provide: an extract from the Luxembourg criminal record issued fewer than 30 days before the application is submitted; or the foreign criminal records, or a similar document, issued by the relevant authorities or from the foreign country or countries in which the applicant is or was a citizen and the foreign country or countries where they have resided since the age of 18 over the course of the 15 years immediately preceding the submission of the application. Other supporting documents The person submitting the application must also provide: a full copy of the minor's birth certificate (rather than merely an extract) issued within the last 3 months; a copy of the minor's valid passport and of those of the persons with parental authority over the minor, or that of the minor's legal representative, or copies of those persons' valid national identity cards. The supporting documents attached to the application must be written : in Luxembourgish; or in French; or in German. If the documents are not in one of these languages, the Minister of Justice may require an original translation produced by a sworn translator certified by the Supreme Court of Justice ( Cour supérieure de justice ) or by a foreign public authority. The Minister of Justice may ask the applicant to provide additional documents. When the applicant is materially unable to submit a particular document , the Minister of Justice may grant an exemption , upon a reasoned request. Follow-up on the application If the applicant is an adult : they will be invited by the Minister of Justice to come in to have their identity checked. The applicant must go in to the Ministry of Justice in person, with their ID card or passport. If the applicant is a minor : they must go in person, accompanied by the persons with parental authority over them, or by their legal representative, all presenting their national ID card or passport. If the child is at least 12 years of age, they must also give their consent to the requested change in gender status and first name(s). If the applicant is a Luxembourg national but does not reside in Luxembourg , they may file a reasoned request to have their identity checked at the nearest Luxembourg consulate, or the consular section of the Luxembourg embassy with jurisdiction for their place of residence. The request must be accompanied by proof of residence abroad. Application approved Applications for a change in gender status and first name(s) are approved or denied by ministerial decree . If the application to change gender status and first name(s) is approved , the applicant must, on their own initiative and as soon as possible , update all public documents issued in Luxembourg, such as their passport, ID card, driving licence, social security card, etc. To do so, they will need to provide: the new extract of their birth certificate , showing their new gender status and first names(s) as they now appear in the updated civil register; the ministerial decree that was sent to them, which can be used as a legal instrument. If there is any doubt as to the fulfilment of the conditions of the law on changing one's gender status or first name(s) ( loi relative à la modification de la mention du sexe et du ou des prénom(s) ), the Minister of Justice will consult the General Public Prosecutor ( Procureur général d’État ), who will then issue an opinion. The Minister of Justice may cancel the change in gender status and first name(s) by ministerial decree if the applicant is found to have made false statements, concealed important facts or acted fraudulently . However, before a decision is taken, the applicant will be invited to provide a written explanation. Refusal of the application If the application to change gender status and first name(s) is refused, the applicant will be sent a copy of the ministerial decree, and may then file: a non-contentious appeal to the Minister of Justice within 3 months of notification of the ministerial decree. Once a non-contentious appeal has been lodged, the time limit for lodging a judicial appeal is suspended. If a new decision is made or if no decision is made within 3 months of the lodging of the non-contentious appeal, a new 3-month period for lodging a judicial appeal with the administrative court begins to run; or a judicial appeal before the administrative court , within 3 months of receiving notification of the ministerial decree. Effects of changing gender status and first name(s) The ministerial decree or judgement establishing the change in gender status and first name(s) will be referenced in the margin of the birth certificate of the person concerned only . If a Luxembourg applicant's birth certificate was drawn up abroad , it will be transcribed in the civil register in: the commune where the applicant has their usual place of residence; or the City of Luxembourg, if the applicant's usual place of residence is not Luxembourg. The ministerial decree will be referenced in the transcribed birth certificate. Concerning the descendants of a person who has had their gender status and first name(s) changed: if the person conceives or gives birth to a child after the change in gender status, their filiation with the child will be established on the basis of their biological sex ; the change in a parent's gender status and first name(s) has no effect whatsoever on their filiation with their children, and the rights and responsibilities arising therefrom; the change in a parent's gender status is not mentioned in their descendants' birth certificates. A change in gender status in the civil register has no effect on obligations arising out of agreements with third parties . Online services and forms Data protection Online services Demande de modification de la mention du sexe et du/des prénom(s) à l’état civil Downloadable forms Note: view tips for using PDF forms . Demande de modification de la mention du sexe et du/des prénoms à l’état civil (Formulaire A) Last update 24.09.2025 PDF 213 Kb Certificate in the context of an application to change gender status and first name(s) in the civil register (Form F) Last update 29.05.2026 PDF 747 Kb Other language(s) fr de Close fr Attestation dans le cadre d’une demande de modification de la mention du sexe et du/des prénoms à l’état civil (Formulaire F) de Bescheinigung im Rahmen eines Antrags auf Änderung der Angabe des Geschlechts und des/der Vornamen(s) im Personenstandsregister (Formular F) Written agreement of the minor’s other parent Last update 29.05.2026 PDF 746 Kb Other language(s) fr de Close fr Accord écrit de l’autre parent de l’enfant mineur de Schriftliche Zustimmung des anderen Elternteils des minderjährigen Kindes Declaration of consent of the minor aged 12 or over Last update 01.06.2026 PDF 709 Kb Other language(s) fr de Close fr Déclaration de consentement du mineur âgé d’au moins 12 ans de Einverständnisserklärung des Minderjährigen, welcher mindestens 12 Jahre alt ist Application for exemption from submitting a full copy of the birth certificate Last update 01.06.2026 PDF 711 Kb Other language(s) fr de Close fr Demande de dispense de remise d’une copie intégrale de l’acte de naissance de Antrag auf Befreiung von der Vorlage einer beglaubigten Abschrift aus dem Geburtenregister Who to contact Hide map Show map Ministry of Justice Civil Law Directorate - Office for the change of gender and first name Address: 13, Rue Erasme, Centre administratif Pierre Werner L-1468 Luxembourg Luxembourg L-2934 Luxembourg Phone: (+352) 247 84023 Telephone reception: Monday and Wednesday from 12.30 to 15.30 / Tuesday and Thursday from 8.30 to 11.30 Email address: changement-de-sexe@mj.etat.lu Website: https://mj.gouvernement.lu/fr.html Show on map Hide map Show map Public Prosecutor's office Civil Register Address: Luxembourg Cité judiciaire - Plateau du Saint-Esprit - L-2080 Luxembourg Phone: (+352) 247 32 341 Phone: (+352) 247 32 375 Email address: repertoire.civil@justice.etat.lu Closed ⋅ Opens Monday at 9.00 Sunday: Closed Monday: 9.00 to 12.00 and 13.00 to 16.00 Tuesday: 9.00 to 12.00 and 13.00 to 16.00 Wednesday: 9.00 to 12.00 and 13.00 to 16.00 Thursday: 9.00 to 12.00 and 13.00 to 16.00 Friday: 9.00 to 12.00 and 13.00 to 16.00 Saturday: Closed Show on map Related procedures and links Procedures Requesting a change of surname and/or first name(s) Links Further information Listes des experts, traducteurs et interprètes assermentés sur le site du ministère de la Justice Legal references Loi du 10 août 2018 relative à la modification de la mention du sexe et du ou des prénoms à l’état civil et portant modification du Code civil. Your opinion matters to us Tell us what you think of this page. You can leave us your feedback on how to improve this page. You will not receive a reply to your feedback. Please use the contact form for any specific questions you might have. Fields marked with an asterisk ( * ) are mandatory . Did you find what you were looking for? * Yes Partially No What information were you looking for? How would you rate this page? * Very poor Very good How can we improve it? Leave a comment to help us improve this page. Do not provide any personal information such as your email address, name, telephone number, etc. 0/1000 Send your opinion Data protection Please rate this page Your opinion has been submitted successfully! Thank you for your contribution. If you need help or have any questions, please use the contact form. Would you like to help us make digital public services more user-friendly by submitting your suggestions for improvement? Then visit Zesumme Vereinfachen, the online participation platform dedicated to administrative simplification in Luxembourg. Let's simplify things together An error occurred Oops, an error has occurred. Footer Tools Access our various tools (simulators, calculators, etc.) that make your daily administrative tasks even easier. Online services & Forms Here you can find the online services and forms you need for your administrative procedures. Tutorials Take a look at our tutorials which take you step-by-step through the key features of MyGuichet.lu. Bodies & Administrations This directory lists all the bodies and administrations mentioned in our information pages in alphabetical order. Mobile application Download the MyGuichet.lu app and get access to online services where, when and how you want. Keep up to date with the latest news from Guichet.lu Subscribe to the newsletter Facebook Linked In Youtube Guichet.lu is the information portal that simplifies your interactions with the State . It gives you quick, user-friendly access to all the information, procedures and services offered by Luxembourg's public administrations and bodies. Help Contact Sitemap Accessibility Legal notice Cookie management Close Data protection Close Close To complete your application, the information about you collected from this form needs to be processed by the public administration concerned. That information is kept by the administration in question for as long as it is required to achieve the purpose of the processing operation(s). Your data will be shared with other public administrations that are necessary for the processing of your application. For details on which departments will have access to the data on this form, please contact the public administration you are filing your application with. Under the terms of Regulation (EU) 2016/679 on the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, you have the right to access, rectify or, where applicable, remove any information relating to you. You are also entitled to withdraw your consent at any time. Additionally, unless the processing of your personal data is compulsory, you may, with legitimate reasons, oppose the processing of such data. If you wish to exercise these rights and/or obtain a record of the information held about you, please contact the administration in question using the contact details provided on the form. You are also entitled to file a claim with the National Commission for Data Protection (Commission nationale pour la protection des données), headquartered at 15, boulevard du Jazz L-4370 Belvaux. By submitting your application, you agree that your personal data may be processed as part of the application process. Back to top