In Shadow of Attack, Situation of Slovakia’s Trans Community Remains Precarious | Balkan Insight Back to BalkanInsight About Premium Subscription Newsletters Contact Follow us: Search Insight Analysis Features Interviews Opinion Investigations Countries Albania Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czech Republic Hungary Kosovo Moldova Montenegro North Macedonia Poland Romania Serbia Slovakia In Focus Impact of Ukraine War Far-Right Extremism Belarus-Poland Border Crisis Protests and Pushback Media Freedom Demographic Crisis Trends Report 2026: Populism in Central Europe: A Reprise 2025: Trumped in Central Europe 2024: Life in the Time of ‘Polycrisis’ 2023: War Focuses Minds 2022: Certainties, Doubts and Imponderables 2021: COVID’s Lingering Effects 2020: Democracy After Coronavirus Fellowship Podcasts VoiCEE PODCAST TWiCE podcast Subscribe About Analysis In Shadow of Attack, Situation of Slovakia’s Trans Community Remains Precarious A protestor holds up a sign at a march to condemn hatred against the LGBT community in wake of a terrorist attack on an LGBT bar, in Bratislava on 14 October 2022. PHOTO TASR - Dano Veselský In Shadow of Attack, Situation of Slovakia’s Trans Community Remains Precarious Sara Cincurova Bratislava BIRN February 7, 2023 07:53 Sara Cincurova Bratislava BIRN February 7, 2023 07:53 Long subjected to harmful practices, including forced sterilisation, transgender people in Slovakia are still finding themselves a political target even in the aftermath of the terrorist attack on an LGBT bar in Bratislava. The October 2022 terrorist attack against the LGBT community in Bratislava marked a new era for transgender people in the country, but not one many expect to be more positive. Even though existing requirements to undergo transition were already challenging and included surgical sterilisation before a transgender person could change their documentation, the aftermath of the attack has contributed to even greater fears about the future inside the community, rights groups say. On October 12, a 19-year-old man shot two people dead outside Teplaren, one of the few LGBT bars in Bratislava. A bisexual man and a non-binary person were killed, while a third person was injured but survived. After an investigation, the National Crime Agency concluded that the act constituted a terrorist attack – the first in the history of modern Slovakia. The tragic event came at a time when the climate was already hostile for LGBT people . Diana Pruchnerovicova, an LGBT activist and ex-director of Rainbow Pride Bratislava, said in the aftermath of the attack that her community frequently bore the brunt of hostile statements by politicians from across the political divide in parliament. She referred to a 2013 comment from Slovak MP Stefan Kuffa in relation to LGBT rights, in which he said that, “it would be better to put a millstone around your neck and toss you in the water”. “We are the target of many such statements, and we have no way to defend ourselves,” Pruchnerovicova said. Zara Kromkova, a trans woman and community worker for Prizma, an LGBT support group in Kosice, pointed out that five legislative proposals aiming to ban legal or medical gender transition have come before the current parliament since it began in March 2020. “All of them brought hate narratives against transgender people among the general public,” Kromkova said. “Politicians use transgender people to cover for their failures in other areas, such as fighting the pandemic, inflation or the energy crisis.” Trnava Archbishop Ján Orosch, second from left, celebrates Mass in the Cathedral of St. John the Baptist in Trnava on Thursday, April 18, 2019. TASR PHOTO – Luká Grinaj Victim blaming Igor Matovic, the former prime minister and finance minister, has been one of the most outspoken critics of transgenderism on his Facebook account. One of his comments in early January read: “Turning 12-year-old girls into men? That’s sick. Remade men competing in women’s sports? That’s sick,” he wrote. Critics say Matovic’s attacks on the transgender community are part of his strategy to gain more support among conservative voters. “He is doing this as an attempt to save his political career,” wrote Matus Kostolny, editor-in-chief of the Slovak daily Dennik N. Matovic is also notorious for publishing a controversial Facebook post only a few days after the terrorist attack on Teplaren. “I am hetero,” he wrote at the time. “I am a man and I feel like a man.” In November, it came to light that the archbishop of Trnava, Jan Orosch, had written in an internal document sent to Slovakia’s priests that he did not consider the two queer victims of the terrorist attack to be innocent, and questioned whether the police had actually carried out a drug search of the bar. Orosch later apologised, but his remarks exemplified a conflict between the Slovak Catholic Church and people with more liberal views that can be traced back to a 2013 pastoral letter read out in churches, in which the leadership compared the queer community to a “culture of death”. In the historic centre of Bratislava, someone sprayed several buildings with red inscriptions such as “trans is beauty”, “queer power”, “god is trans” or “queer revolution is coming”, on August 4, 2021. PHOTO TASR – Dano Veselský Cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment For years, Slovakia was one of those European countries that required mandatory sterilisation for transgender people involving the removal of internal reproductive organs – a practice that has been criticised by a wide range of international bodies, including the UN. A 2013 UN report by the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment stated that there is “an abundance of accounts and testimonies of persons being denied medical treatment, subjected to verbal abuse and public humiliation, psychiatric evaluation, a variety of forced procedures such as sterilization, state-sponsored forcible anal examinations for the prosecution of suspected homosexual activities, and invasive virginity examinations conducted by health-care providers, hormone therapy and genitalnormalizing surgeries under the guise of so called ‘reparative therapies’, all of which can have serious impact on the persons’ wellbeing.” The report further stated that, “the mandate has noted that members of sexual minorities are disproportionately subjected to torture and other forms of ill-treatment because they fail to conform to socially constructed gender expectations,” adding that 29 European states required forced sterilisations at the time. Yet in April 2022, guidelines for gender recognition in Slovakia were changing . The health minister at the time, Vladimir Lengvarsky, signed a new gender reassignment protocol suspending surgical sterilisation, which activists openly welcomed. But in the months that followed, conservative politicians, such as Anna Zaborska from the Christian Union party as well as 20 conservative politicians from the coalition-leading Ordinary People and Independent Personalities (OĽaNO) opposed the document. Lengvarsky was subjected to sustained political attack, which led him to suspend the protocol shortly after it was signed. In December 22, a group of medical professionals signed a collective statement opposing any form of transition therapy for transgender people. The signatories, which now number over 400, referred to a medical definition of “transsexualism”, that “the origin of the disease remains unknown and does not have a biological origin”, and that medical or social transition are not therefore a solution. The petition has been widely criticised by human rights organisations, including Amnesty International, which accuses the signatories of “misleading [their audience] and basing their demands on wrong interpretations of data and studies of dubious sources”. As of today, the practice of sterilisation remains in place in Slovakia. A transgender man who wished to stay in anonymity for fear of reprisals told BIRN that a psychiatrist is currently “forcing him to undergo a hysterectomy”, causing great psychological distress. “There is still an ‘F’ for female on my legal documents, impossible to change without the sterilisation. It has been like that for seven years,” he explained, adding that the doctor still uses his female name and tells him their “anatomy cannot be lied to”. “I was also told that I was a ‘deviant’ by a urologist and a gynaecologist who saw my body,” he told BIRN. Kromkova from Prizma told BIRN that similar cases are frequent and that many doctors “use obsolete methods that often include checking the underwear of the trans person.” She added that humiliation, doubting trans people’s true feelings and conditioning the transition by forcing a divorce on the person in cases they were married before, are also frequent. Andrej Kuruc, a psychologist working for InPoradna helpline for LGBT people in Slovakia, told BIRN that many transgender people don’t even dare to go out on the streets. “They go through distressing attacks at the hands of politicians and medical authorities – such as the comments of Igor Matovic. They hear that they are sick or deviant, and should undergo conversion therapies, which further worsens their psychological health,” Kuruc said. He added that in the current climate, many transgender people consider leaving the country or even entertain ideas of suicide. LGBT rights Slovakia Terrorism Related Articles November 11, 2022 Democracy Digest: Slovak Archbishop Can’t Resist Victim Blaming October 17, 2022 Years of LGBT Intolerance in Slovakia Culminate in Two Killings September 10, 2019 Slovakia Lags on LGBT Rights, Says Ombudswoman Sara Cincurova VIEW ALL POSTS ABOUT THE PROJECT Manage Consent To provide the best experiences, we and our partners use technologies like cookies to store and/or access device information. Consenting to these technologies will allow us and our partners to process personal data such as browsing behavior or unique IDs on this site and show (non-) personalized ads. Not consenting or withdrawing consent, may adversely affect certain features and functions. Click below to consent to the above or make granular choices. Your choices will be applied to this site only. You can change your settings at any time, including withdrawing your consent, by using the toggles on the Cookie Policy, or by clicking on the manage consent button at the bottom of the screen. Functional Functional Always active The technical storage or access is strictly necessary for the legitimate purpose of enabling the use of a specific service explicitly requested by the subscriber or user, or for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission of a communication over an electronic communications network. Preferences Preferences The technical storage or access is necessary for the legitimate purpose of storing preferences that are not requested by the subscriber or user. Statistics Statistics The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for statistical purposes. The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for anonymous statistical purposes. Without a subpoena, voluntary compliance on the part of your Internet Service Provider, or additional records from a third party, information stored or retrieved for this purpose alone cannot usually be used to identify you. Marketing Marketing The technical storage or access is required to create user profiles to send advertising, or to track the user on a website or across several websites for similar marketing purposes. Statistics Marketing Features Always active Always active Manage options Manage services Manage {vendor_count} vendors Read more about these purposes Accept Deny View preferences Save preferences View preferences {title} {title} {title} Manage consent