Trans women face hurdles in reporting violence - BBSCL Monday, September 28, 2026 GMC Contact Us About BBS Privacy & Policy ENG DZO Home Business Politics Sports Education Announcement More Audience Survey Report Programme BBS Radio Channel Schedule Intranet Radio Live No Result View All Result Home Business Politics Sports Education Announcement More Audience Survey Report Programme BBS Radio Channel Schedule Intranet No Result View All Result Trans women face hurdles in reporting violence Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Violence and discrimination against transgender individuals remain widespread despite legal and social progress. Studies show that transgender people are over four times more likely to experience assault. Trans women in Bhutan say that given the harsh realities, there is a need for justice, equality, and inclusive policies that protect and empower all genders. 49-year-old Penjor is a trans woman. As difficult as it was for her to come out as a trans-woman, it was a struggle for her to maintain a relationship, be it with her family or her partner. Penjor was often publicly discriminated and assaulted. She recalls times when she could not find a place to seek support or report such incidents. “There’s nowhere for us to turn to report incidents. If I’m assaulted by my boyfriend or a friend, there’s no place to seek help. When I approach my family, they tell me that our community is too small and I should accept it as my fate. Though the LGBTQIA+ committee offers some help, we are often redirected to multiple organizations, which delays the process.” Penjor feels that the legal system in Bhutan fails to offer adequate protection for transgenders. “There are laws, but they only cater to men and women. They do not consider trans women. I have been a victim of violence, and while the police take up the case, they often dismiss it, saying both parties are men. Because my identity card classifies me as male, I face harsh comments and discrimination,” says Penjor. Research published in Social Science and Medicine 2021, shows that transgender individuals are at double the risk of experiencing physical intimate partner violence. Another survey showed that nearly 30 per cent of transgender people report experiencing some form of intimate partner violence. Another trans woman, Tshering Tshokey, has been working for the transgender community for years. Through her work, Tshering gained a broader perspective on the violence that trans women face. Tshering Tshokey says, “Most trans women face violence, but it’s rarely acknowledged or reported. Many are beaten by their boyfriends and experience intimate partner violence, financial abuse, and societal discrimination. Trans women are sometimes forced out of their homes due to their gender identity.” They say although the Penal Code of Bhutan decriminalises the LGBT community, transgender individuals still struggle with the inability to officially change their gender on legal documents. This limitation impacts their access to opportunities, their ability to report incidents, and their pursuit of justice. The head of The PEMA said that the organisation looks into all cases referred to them without discrimination based on sexual orientation, gender, or caste. While counselling services like those offered by the PEMA are essential, trans women like Tshering believe more must be done to address the unique challenges faced by the transgender community. “When we talk about women facing violence, where are my trans sisters? If we are discussing men’s struggles, we must also include trans men. Transgender people face the same societal pressures to conform, whether male or female. We need to diversify our approach and start by collaborating across gender lines to ensure everyone’s voice is heard,” Tshering Tshokey adds. Despite the progress, trans women in the country continue to face physical and emotional abuse from intimate partners, family, and society. To create a truly inclusive society, collective efforts are needed to ensure justice and equality for all genders, free from violence and discrimination. Sonam Yuden Edited by Kipchu RECOMMENDED NEWS 13 years ago 14 Public debt increases by Nu 7bn in fourth quarter of 2023 3 years ago 35 State of the Nation Report 7 years ago 35 More than 5,000 teachers complete Digital Teacher Course 3 years ago 130 BROWSE BY CATEGORIES Accidents (17) Agriculture (657) Announcement (245) Anti Corruption Commission of Bhutan (2) Audience Survey Report (2) Business (921) Climate Change (8) Crime/Legal (461) Culture (117) Development (113) Disaster (109) Economy (433) Education (537) Entertainment (36) Environment (183) Feature (92) Featured (16) Festival (125) Global Peace Prayer Festival (4) GMC (109) Gyalsung (2) Headlines (12) Health (794) HYDROPOWER (28) K4 70th Birthday special feature (2) Legal (89) Literature (11) Livestock (107) Media (46) Other Stories (7,409) Pelsung (2) Politics (448) RCSC (14) Recent stories (5) Religion (79) Sci/Tech (766) Social (1,013) Sports (607) Technology (235) Textile (3) Tourism (70) Uncategorized (13,894) Video (142) Video Story (258) Wildlife (57) BROWSE BY TOPICS Tender Announcement Vacancy Announcement POPULAR NEWS ‘News in Tales’ workshop equips Bhutanese journalists with narrative storytelling skills 0 shares Share 0 Tweet 0 Viral video of Bhutanese man assaulted by locals and police in Jaigaon sparks safety concerns 0 shares Share 0 Tweet 0 Dzongkha Books, the last to be bought. 0 shares Share 0 Tweet 0 Authorities link 23 TikTok accounts to online shopping-based gambling, freeze 26 other bank accounts 0 shares Share 0 Tweet 0 Gelephu Mindfulness City opens recruitment drive for Bhutanese professionals 0 shares Share 0 Tweet 0 Bhutan Broadcasting Service (BBS) is Bhutan’s primary national broadcaster, delivering diverse news and entertainment in multiple languages, fostering cultural understanding and public knowledge. Follow us on social media: Recent News Kathri begins in Paro, drawing thousands of devotees Government targets two USD 50M home-grown enterprises by 2030 Thousands of tonnes of crops lost despite rising production Kathri crowd surpasses initial 10,000 estimate Dungkar Nagtshang restored as Jigme Namgyal Museum, preserving centuries-old heritage News Category Accidents Agriculture Announcement Anti Corruption Commission of Bhutan Audience Survey Report Business Climate Change Crime/Legal Culture Development Disaster Economy Education Entertainment Environment Feature Featured Festival Global Peace Prayer Festival GMC Gyalsung Headlines Health HYDROPOWER K4 70th Birthday special feature Legal Literature Livestock Media Other Stories Pelsung Politics RCSC Recent stories Religion Sci/Tech Social Sports Technology Textile Tourism Uncategorized Video Video Story Wildlife GMC Contact Us About BBS Privacy & Policy © 2024 BBSCL. All rights reserved. Welcome Back! Login to your account below Remember Me Forgotten Password? Retrieve your password Please enter your username or email address to reset your password. Log In 🔊 BBS.BT Listen to Article ▲ ⏹ Stop ▶ Play Listen to Article 0.75× 0.9× 1× 1.25× 1.5× 2× Add New Playlist - Select Visibility - Public Private RADIO LIVE No Result View All Result Home Business Politics Sports Education Announcement More Audience Survey Report Programme BBS Radio Channel Schedule Intranet © 2024 BBSCL. All rights reserved. ♿ ACCESSIBILITY A+ Increase Text A- Decrease Text ◑ Grayscale ◐ High Contrast U Link Underline Aa Readable Font ↖ Big Cursor ↺ Reset All ♿ ACCESS