Namibia celebrates LGBTI+ Pride in Windhoek and Swakopmund (Pictures) - MambaOnline - LGBTQ South Africa online Skip to content Southern Africa's longest-running LGBTQ+ News and Community Platform Home News Culture & Events Health & Well-Being Community Project Transcend Resources & Advice Relationships Sexuality Health Identity Organisations About Our Story Advertise With Us Newsletter Editorial Code Contact Foundation Donate Home News Culture & Events Health & Well-Being Community Project Transcend Resources & Advice Relationships Sexuality Health Identity Organisations About Our Story Advertise With Us Newsletter Editorial Code Contact Foundation Donate Search Donate SIGN UP Home News Culture & Events Health & Well-Being Community Project Transcend Resources & Advice Relationships Sexuality Health Identity Organisations About Our Story Advertise With Us Newsletter Editorial Code Contact Foundation Donate Home News Culture & Events Health & Well-Being Community Project Transcend Resources & Advice Relationships Sexuality Health Identity Organisations About Our Story Advertise With Us Newsletter Editorial Code Contact Foundation Donate Namibia celebrates LGBTI+ Pride in Windhoek and Swakopmund (Pictures) Roberto Igual Dec 12, 2018 HEADLINES Dozens of people have marched in the cities of Windhoek and Swakopmund to assert the rights of the LGBTI+ community in Namibia. On 1 December, World AIDS day, LGBTI+ Namibians, activists and many allies gathered at the Bank Windhoek Theatre School in Windhoek for the start of the city’s annual Pride march. Activist and sexual health advocate Aedin Mohrmann called it the “biggest pride event” to date in Namibia. The procession, held under the banner of #WeAreOne, was led by the Coded MCC Namibia bikers along with two Namibian Police Force escort cars, he said. These were followed by a decorated float truck, a huge rainbow flag carried by community members and allies followed by a mobile HIV testing clinic from Walvis Bay Corridor Group. It was “a truly colourful and diverse group,” Mohrmann noted. Halfway during the march, the participants stopped at the National Independence Museum of Namibia for a moment of silence in solidarity with all LGBTI+ members lost to the AIDS crisis and with fellow African LGBTI+ people that live in regions with homophobic and transphobic regimes, such as Tanzania. It was “a truly powerful moment, as we stood in silence under the statue of Namibia’s own founding father Sam Nujoma, who himself has incited stigma, discrimination, and hate against the Namibian LGBTI+ community in the past, which still lingers today in the streets and comments sections of popular Namibian newspapers’ social media pages,” said Mohrmann. After a mass group photo, the marchers proceeded to the Franco-Namibian Cultural Centre where they were treated to an LGBTI+ community market day with food stalls, drinks, face painting, free sexual health testing, and arts and crafts for sale. The day concluded with a party and live performances. “It was a success all the way through, and most importantly love and acceptance was felt vibrating through the entire venue,” said Mohrmann. “It is an exciting time to be a part of this movement in our country! We are on the cusp of big change regarding acceptance and diversity in Namibian society and starting up a whole new pink money sector in our economy.” A more modest second #WeAreOne Pride march was also held in the coastal city of Swakopmund, in western Namibia, on Saturday 8 December. One of the organisers, Tatum Strauss, said it was unfortunate that they had little support from the municipality and the police, which hampered the event. “The turnout was small but it was a success,” she told MambaOnline. Under colonial era laws, consensual “sodomy” remains illegal in Namibia and could be used to prosecute gay men, although this is not believed to have happened since the country’s independence in 1990. Same-sex couples also have no legal recognition. Namibia’s first LGBTI community and health centre was launched in May by Out-Right Namibia in Windhoek. In October, 21-year-old activist and law student Rivelino Reinecke was crowned Mr Gay Namibia 2018 . A 2016 UN Human Rights Committee report urged Namibia to adopt legislation explicitly prohibiting discrimination based on sexual orientation, including in the Labour Act, and to adopt hate crime legislation punishing homophobic and transphobic violence. Below is a gallery of pictures of Windhoek Pride 2018, courtesy of Land of The Queers and Wings To Transcend Namibia . Leave a Comment Cancel reply Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked * Comment * Name * Email * Website Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment. Δ Trending Articles Thami Dish Is Married! Meet His Husband Dr Wesley Willis and Read Their Love Story Cape Town Rainbow Crosswalk Vandalism Unleashes Flood of Anti-LGBTQ+ Hate Man Who Says He Vandalised Cape Town Rainbow Crossing Comes Forward Cape Town’s Rainbow Crossing Vandalised – Twice! ‘I’m Surprised I Woke Up’: Gay Man Attacked with Broken Bottle in Pretoria West Your subscription could not be saved. Please try again. Your subscription has been successful. Mamba Wrap Newsletter Our FREE weekly newsletter that keeps you updated on the latest LGBTQ+ news and views - delivered straight to your inbox! Enter your email address to subscribe Provide your email address to subscribe. For e.g abc@xyz.com SUBSCRIBE Facebook X-twitter Instagram Youtube Threads Tiktok Linkedin Whatsapp Sign Up Privacy Policy RSS Feeds Sign Up Privacy Policy RSS Feeds Copyright © 2026 MambaOnline Facebook X-twitter Instagram Youtube Threads Tiktok Linkedin Whatsapp We use cookies to ensure that we give you the best experience on our website. If you continue to use this site we will assume that you are happy with it. Ok