Suriname | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Suriname At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Legal Gender Recognition Possible? No LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? Yes Last Update: March 12, 2026 The Constitution of the Republic of Suriname offers LGBTIQ people some protection against discrimination. Article 8.2 prohibits discrimination based on birth, sex, race, language, religion, education, political opinion, economic position, or any other status. The government has argued that inclusion of “any other status” is understood to extend to sexual orientation and gender identity. In 2022, Parliament passed the Equal Treatment Labor Act (Wet Gelijke Behandeling Arbeid, S.B. 2022 no. 137), which explicitly bans discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity in the workplace. Same-sex intercourse is not criminalized, and the penal code protects against hate speech. The law on legal gender recognition has advanced by virtue of a recent court decision concerning a transgender person who had undergone gender-affirming surgery and was living her life as a woman for approximately 10 years. In January 2022, in De Staat Suriname v. Paris Yvanna Simson , Suriname’s appeals court ordered the registration of a gender change on the birth register, notwithstanding the lack of legislation allowing for legal gender recognition. The Court emphasized that fundamental human rights, in particular protection from discrimination and respect for the right to private life as provided for under international human rights treaties and the Surinamese Constitution, extend to transgender persons. Where a local law or gap in the law conflicts with one of these fundamental human rights, the local law must be declared unlawful, and the protection of fundamental rights prevails. The court decided that it then followed that the affected person was entitled to legal gender recognition and gender reassignment. The court rejected the state’s argument that legal gender recognition must be arrived at via a legislative process and further stressed that the state cannot continue to invoke the absence of legislation if it does not take any initiatives to that effect itself. Despite the law restricting marriage to heterosexual unions and a 2023 constitutional court finding that this restriction was not unconstitutional , in February 2025, the Suriname First District Court ruled that the Central Bureau for Civil Affairs (CBB) was mandated to register the marriages of two same-sex couples who had married abroad. This decision applies only to the parties and does not represent a reform of the law. In 2024, the Suriname National Assembly made history by voting to include sexual orientation and gender identity as categories in the national census. Suriname was one of the first countries in the region to do so. Activists celebrated the step as an opportunity for evidence-based inclusion in government policy. Social perceptions of people of queer experience are somewhat positive. According to a 2017 study, 83 percent of people in Suriname accepted or tolerated “homosexual” people. However, in practice, and despite the state’s efforts to increase tolerance toward LGBTIQ people in Suriname, sexual and gender minorities continue to experience violence, discrimination, harassment, and public hostility. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International