Guernsey to follow relaxation of UK blood donor rules - BBC News BBC Homepage Skip to content Accessibility Help Your account Home News Sport Earth Reel Worklife Travel Culture Future Music TV Weather Sounds More menu More menu Search BBC Home News Sport Earth Reel Worklife Travel Culture Future Music TV Weather Sounds Close menu BBC News Menu Home Climate World UK Business Tech Science Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures More BBC Verify Newsbeat Europe Guernsey Guernsey to follow relaxation of UK blood donor rules Published 23 September 2011 Share close panel Share page Copy link About sharing Guernsey is to follow the UK's relaxation of its blood donor rules, by allowing gay and bisexual men to donate. The UK Government announced it would allow donations, as long as the donor has not had sex with another man in the past year. Guernsey's Health and Social Services Department said it tended to follow national guidelines on blood donation. The department aims to make the change close to 7 November. That is the date on which the UK will change its rules. Deputy Hunter Adam, the Minister for the Health and Social Services Department, said: "There's a criteria across a wide spectrum of aspects in relation to giving blood." He added: "It is so important that we make sure it is as safe as possible to give blood and for someone to have blood given to them." Other restrictions on blood donations in Guernsey will remain in place. The restriction on donations from gay men was implemented in the 1980s to prevent the risk of HIV contamination. More on this story End of gay blood ban is welcomed Published 20 September 2011 Gay blood donor ban to be lifted Published 8 September 2011 Call for more island blood donors Published 3 February 2011 Related internet links Guernsey Pathology The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. From other local news sites New section of pipe ready for repair to damaged sewage outfall External Guernsey Press Peak generosity: Mountain climb raises £22.5k for Les Bourgs in memory of Rose External Bailiwick Express Forward Guernsey wants to limit length of speeches during next week’s tax debate External Guernsey Press Can you 'restart a heart'? External Bailiwick Express Island politician proposes to cut aid budget for ten years External ITV.com First woman to take up nearly 800-year-old Bailiff role promises to 'dismantle barriers' External ITV.com Information about BBC links to other news sites The video playlist Watch our pick of standout clips from across the BBC Previous Next 1:31 The ups and downs of SpaceX's Starship test flights. 00:01:31, play video The ups and downs of SpaceX's Starship test flights 1:18 At the scene of counter-terrorism operation near RAF Fairford. 00:01:18, play video At the scene of counter-terrorism operation near RAF Fairford 0:39 Hundreds block Orange Order march in Northern Ireland. 00:00:39, play video Hundreds block Orange Order march in Northern Ireland 0:56 PM proposes NHS style social care system for England. 00:00:56, play video PM proposes NHS style social care system for England 1:13 Buckingham Palace hosts dance lessons. 00:01:13, play video Buckingham Palace hosts dance lessons 1:03 Is Labour's housing scheme a new idea, or an old Tory one? 00:01:03, play video Is Labour's housing scheme a new idea, or an old Tory one? 0:55 How to win an aura battle. 00:00:55, play video How to win an aura battle 1:35 The peculiar way Poirot got his walk. 00:01:35, play video The peculiar way Poirot got his walk 1:27 Could Manchester City lose some of its trophies? 00:01:27, play video Could Manchester City lose some of its trophies? 1:30 Using AI to detect fake goods online. 00:01:30, play video Using AI to detect fake goods online 0:47 'They've behaved so badly' says Man City fan. 00:00:47, play video 'They've behaved so badly' says Man City fan 1:10 Is it OK to take an iced coffee to a job interview? 00:01:10, play video Is it OK to take an iced coffee to a job interview? 1:09 What are the charges against Man City? 00:01:09, play video What are the charges against Man City? 0:35 Rory Stewart on his viral Newsnight moment. 00:00:35, play video Rory Stewart on his viral Newsnight moment 1:08 Why is the Pope in France? 00:01:08, play video Why is the Pope in France? 0:47 Should we ban the word 'awesome'? 00:00:47, play video Should we ban the word 'awesome'? 1:37 Question Time panel clash over welfare policy. 00:01:37, play video Question Time panel clash over welfare policy Top stories Five arrested as counter-terror police investigate major incident near RAF Fairford Published 1 hour ago What we know about RAF Fairford counter-terror probe Published 1 hour ago Burnham proposes NHS-style social care system for England Published 7 hours ago More to explore Celebrity Traitors 2 cast: Who are this year's 'big dogs' and dark horses? I was born while my mother was in an iron lung Killer Christa Pike to be executed within days - but her defence say she's a victim too Child's hidden letter found after 44 years I was angry at my husband - I didn't know he had dementia School holiday fines climb despite growing backlash 'Our wedding present left us gutted': Couple join dozens in car seller dispute US Politics Unspun: Cut through the noise with Anthony Zurcher's newsletter Could an iced coffee freeze you out of the job market? Elsewhere on the BBC Anne Hathaway and Jessica Chastain star in a psychological thriller How many dead people are on the internet? The hit podcast explores Thomas More's iconic text 'Utopia' Was Colin Norris wrongly convicted of killing his patients? Most read 1 Five arrested as counter-terror police investigate major incident near RAF Fairford 2 What we know about RAF Fairford counter-terror probe 3 Burnham proposes NHS-style social care system for England 4 No handshakes between Republic of Ireland and Israel 5 Ten NHS staff removed over Noah Woods data breach 6 Orange Order march row goes to heart of ongoing divisions in Northern Ireland 7 Two mass shootings in South Africa leave 27 dead 8 Killer Christa Pike to be executed within days - but her defence say she's a victim too 9 Celebrity Traitors 2 cast: Who are this year's 'big dogs' and dark horses? 10 Traitors star burgled after sharing holiday photos BBC News Services On your mobile On smart speakers Get news alerts Contact BBC News Home News Sport Earth Reel Worklife Travel Culture Future Music TV Weather Sounds Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Careers BBC emails for you Advertise with us Copyright © 2026 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.