Ecuador | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Ecuador At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Legal Gender Recognition Possible? Yes LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? Yes Last Update: March 12, 2026 In 2019, Ecuador legalized same-sex marriage, but adoption for same-sex couples remains illegal due to a constitutional ban . Legal gender recognition has been possible since 2016, but it is not currently available to individuals under 18. Ecuador prohibits some forms of conversion practices that aim to change a person’s sexual orientation or gender identity, with the law explicitly criminalizing conversion practices involving torture. Ecuador’s constitution bans discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or “any other distinguishing feature [which might] result in the diminishment or annulment of recognition, enjoyment or exercise of rights,” although gender identity, gender expression, and sex characteristics are not explicitly mentioned. Despite this prohibition, LGBTIQ people suffer discrimination from both private individuals and government officials. Police and prosecutors often fail to investigate hate crimes committed due to the actual or perceived sexual orientation or gender identity of the victim. At a regional level, according to a 2024 survey , Ecuador is among the Latin American countries with the lowest levels of support for “laws prohibiting discrimination against LGBT people in terms of employment, access to education, housing, social services, etc.” In 2025, Ecuador conducted its first official national survey on the living conditions, social inclusion, and human rights of LGBTI people, led by the National Institute of Statistics and Census (INEC). The study found that 70.9 percent of respondents had experienced discrimination, control, or violence within their family environment, while public spaces were identified as the most common setting for discrimination and violence. In 2025, Ecuador’s high court ruled in favor of a trans girl whose school failed to support her during her transition. The court ordered the Ministry of Education to develop and implement a mandatory protocol to ensure respect for the rights of LGBT children in schools within six months. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International