Rosie's gay cruise is backed by Bermuda's leader | PinkNews About Us Advertise Work with us Login Register Latest News View all UK US World Health Politics Sport Business Culture View all TV Film Celebrity Drag Theatre Music Gaming Lifestyle View all Beauty Careers Fashion Relationships Travel Shopping View all Deals Recommended Fashion & Beauty Tickets Video View all News & Politics Entertainment Lifestyle Discover Trans Awareness Week Drag Race Explainers The Queer Agenda Toggle menu Account Register Login Culture Rosie’s gay cruise is backed by Bermuda’s leader Apr 03 2007 Written by Amy Bourke Share Save for later Comment The Premier of Bermuda has dismissed requests for Rose O’Donnell’s gay and lesbian family cruise to be cancelled. Speaking during a dinner with Bermudian students in Canada, Premier Ewart Brown defended his position on allowing the cruise to come to Bermuda. He said: “If we discriminate against a cruise ship, then we would have to send a homosexual detection unit to the airport.” The American TV personality’s big boat holiday will sail from New York to Bermuda from July 7 to July 14. Queer News. Straight Up. The LGBTQ+ stories you don’t want to miss, delivered to your inbox daily. Email address required Must be valid email Register By registering you agree to our Privacy Policy Thanks for registering! You can update your email subscriptions at any time in the My profile section of your account. The Norwegian Dawn ship is due to arrive in Bermuda on July 12. Christian churches in Bermuda said they oppose the same sex lifestyle of many of the anticipated passengers of the cruise. “The lifestyle is incompatible with the word of God and the Christian moral fibre of our beautiful Bermuda,” the AME church told the Royal Gazette newspaper. R Family Vacations, the travel company organising the event are advertising it as “the most inclusive LGBT vacation offered.” A documentary made of the first such cruise in 2004, All Aboard! Rosie’s Family Cruise, was nominated for three Emmy awards. O’Donnell came out as a lesbian in 2002. Two years later, she married her long time girlfriend Kelli Carpenter in San Francisco. Dec 01 2023 16 TV stars you grew up watching who later came out as LGBTQ+ The couple have three adopted children and a fourth conceived through sperm donation. Related articles Africa Jul 10 Gay cruise rejected by Turkey also blocked by Egypt, organisers say Travel Oct 09 2025 All aboard! This new all-gay, trans-inclusive fetish cruise sounds raunchy as hell Celebrity Sep 10 2025 Rosie O’Donnell ‘never got over’ the ‘painful’ end of her friendship with Ellen DeGeneres US Jul 14 2025 Donald Trump threatens to revoke Rosie O’Donnell’s citizenship – is he allowed to? Celebrity Jul 14 2025 Ellen DeGeneres throws support behind Rosie O’Donnell amid Trump attacks despite their 20-year feud Latest News Previous Next Celebrity Sep 25 Trans influencer calls out Nikki Glaser for stand-up joke about what’s ‘in her pants’ Culture Sep 25 Trans pro wrestling trailblazer Gisele Shaw signs exclusive NWA contract Bisexual Sep 25 The Traitors star Freddie Fraser’s mum’s emotional response to his coming out Celebrity Sep 25 Lili Reinhart says Hollywood ‘too afraid’ to greenlight lesbian vampire project Celebrity Sep 25 Carly Rae Jepsen describes moment Heated Rivalry inspired her son’s name Celebrity Sep 25 John Green ‘heartbroken’ for trans Harry Potter fans as he talks JK Rowling Current Affairs Sep 25 JD Vance claims James Talarico has a “weird obsession with children in drag” News Sep 25 Susan Sarandon, Hannah Einbinder and Caleb Hearon detained outside UN after protesting Netanyahu What to buy now Previous Next Fashion Mar 27 Connor Ives and MAC team up to re-release the iconic ‘Protect The Dolls’ t-shirt Music Mar 12 The Pussycat Dolls confirm reunion with new single and tour – how to get tickets Music Jan 23 A full guide to the 2026 Harry Styles Together, Together tour including dates and presale info Shopping Nov 24 2025 Ten truly awesome Christmas gifts you can buy to support queer-owned businesses Trans Sep 09 2025 Lush creates ‘luxurious’ trans flag bath bomb to support trans charities Tickets Jun 25 2025 Dolly Parton announces mini Las Vegas residency after wrapping her last tour almost a decade ago Shopping May 15 2025 LEGO celebrates late gay icon Keith Haring with new art set: ‘Want this so bad’ Music Apr 18 2025 Primavera Sound’s most iconic queer performances, from Troye Sivan to Ethel Cain Exclusive Previous Next Exclusive Sep 11 Ania Magliano talks SNL UK season two and anti-LGBTQ voices in comedy: ‘We do edgy in the right way’ Exclusive Sep 11 Elliot Tuttle on Blue Film’s personal inspiration, rejection and taboo: ‘It’s about loneliness’ Exclusive Sep 09 OF star Andy Lee on love for gay fans, ‘poisonous’ creators and ‘harmful’ stunts: ‘Gay men lift me up every day’ Exclusive Sep 07 Real Housewives of London spill the tea: ‘She’d go to the opening of a packet of crisps’ Opinion Sep 04 Katseye in London: A showcase of real talent deserving of the deafening screams Exclusive Sep 02 Adrian Chiarella and Joe Bird on tackling conversion therapy in gay horror Leviticus Exclusive Aug 21 Sziget Festival drag and circus troupe want audiences to feel like family Exclusive Aug 20 Gay wrestler Anthony Bowens says Heated Rivalry shows authentic life of closeted athletes Register to save articles and more. It'll only take a minute and it's free. JOIN US TODAY! Already have an account? Log in here "/> Download the PinkNews app Award winning LGBTQ+ journalism About us Editorial Policy Contact us Advertise Work for us Terms and conditions Privacy policy Privacy manager Privacy Manager