Inciting hatred of 'dirty' homosexuality is the point, says Terengganu exco member | The Star × View Subscriptions person person Profile Change Password Manage Logins Subscription Info Transactions Billing Info Manage For You Bookmarks Package & Pricing FAQs Log Out Toggle navigation Toggle navigation StarPlus News Asean+ ESG Business Sport Metro Lifestyle Food Tech Education Opinion Videos Photos StarPicks Subscriptions person person Profile Change Password Manage Logins Subscription Info Transactions Billing Info Manage For You Bookmarks Package & Pricing FAQs Log Out Home StarPlus News Latest Nation World Environment In Other Media True or Not Focus Asean+ ESG Business News Insight Unit Trust Exchange Rates My Portfolio Market Watch Bursa Overview Market Movers Financial Results Dividends Bonus IPO Sport Football Golf Badminton Tennis Motorsport Athletics Hockey Other Sports Say What Metro Metro News Community Sports Views Lifestyle Entertainment & Style People & Living Health & Family Travel & Culture Viewpoints Food Food News Eating Out Food for Thought Kuali Tech Tech Thoughts Education News Opinion Columnists Letters Videos Photos StarPicks More Classifieds Events StarCherish.com - pts chevron_right info_outline Stay signed in to save your points and redeem your rewards at Nexus featured_seasonal_and_gifts +0 × Your Rewards are Waiting! Stay signed in to save the points you've earned. Click on the points to redeem your rewards at Nexus before they expire. Login In Now Don't show this again Nation Inciting hatred of 'dirty' homosexuality is the point, says Terengganu exco member By R. SEKARAN Saturday, 10 May 2025 | 11:43 AM MYT share bookmark Related Stories World 26 Mar 2026 Finland's Supreme Court fines MP for calling homosexuality 'developmental disorder' World 03 Feb 2026 Case against Ugandan man charged with "aggravated homosexuality" dropped, lawyer says World 08 Apr 2024 Vatican opposes criminalisation of homosexuality, top cardinal says KUALA TERENGGANU: The Terengganu government does not deny that the messages on a warning signboard regarding homosexual practices installed in several strategic locations in the state are indeed intended to instil hatred towards such acts among the community. State local government, housing and health exco Datuk Wan Sukairi Wan Abdullah said the action was part of an effort to educate the people to stay away from things that go against religious values and societal norms. "We really want the people to hate homosexual acts. We want them to consider it dirty, wrong and to be avoided. "Signboards like this are part of an effort to brighten up the city's atmosphere with Islamic symbols," Sinar Harian quoted him as saying on Saturday (May 10). Wan Sukairi was commenting on a report by a local news portal which questioned the existence of a prohibition sign related to homosexuality near Universiti Malaysia Terengganu (UMT). He added that the installation of the sign provides a constant reminder to the public, especially in areas that are popular with young people, including institutions of higher learning (IPT). "We are targeting the IPT area because there are many young people there. "This message is important so that they do not get caught up in negative things," he added. Wan Shukri stressed that each local authority (PBT) in Terengganu can choose a different delivery style, but the purpose remains the same, which is to educate and prevent. The move received criticism from several parties, including transgender activist Nisha Ayub, who described it as a form of institutionalised discrimination and a dangerous endorsement of hatred. Follow us on our official WhatsApp channel for breaking news alerts and key updates! Tags / Keywords: Homosexuality , Hatred , Wan Sukairi Wan Abdullah , Signboard , Terengganu Report a mistake What is the issue about? Spelling and grammatical error Factually incorrect Story is irrelevant This field is mandatory. Please provide details of the report. Email (optional) Please enter valid email. Report issue Cancel Invalid captcha response. Please re-try again. Thank you for your report! Related News World 26 Mar 2026 Finland's Supreme Court fines MP for calling homosexuality 'developmental disorder' World 03 Feb 2026 Case against Ugandan man charged with "aggravated homosexuality" dropped, lawyer says Nation 10 May 2025 Inciting hatred of 'dirty' homosexuality is the point, says Terengganu exco member × StarPicks SUNWAY EXPANSION TO BOOST JOHOR HEALTHCARE Next In Nation Negri reps leave Umno HQ without speaking to media after meeting Malaysia, UNODC strengthen pact against complex transnational crimes University holdings, including UiTM Holdings under review since 2025, says Zambry Malaysia, Kazakhstan to revive higher education cooperation, says Zambry Bangkok floods: Embassy distributes food aid to flood victims Year Two Pupil dies in crash on the way to school Negri crisis: BN reps arrive for talks with Ahmad Zahid Anwar congratulates Eain Yow for defending Asiad squash gold Dr Zaliha denies officiating groundbreaking ceremonies for Myanmar refugee settlements Brewhaha: RM1mil in smuggled coffee seedlings, lorry seized Trending in News Others Also Read Load more Subscriptions The Star Digital Access Newsstand Advertising Our Rate Card Classifieds Company Info About Us Job Opportunities Investor Relations Help Contact Us FAQs Policies Privacy Statement Terms & Conditions Copyright © 1995- Star Media Group Berhad [197101000523 (10894-D)] Best viewed on Chrome browsers. Home For You Bookmark Audio Search Download now! We would love to keep you posted on the latest promotion. Kindly fill the form below Skip Disclaimer: by clicking the Submit button, it is deemed that you consent to the rules and terms set forth in the Privacy Policy as well as Terms and Conditions set forth by this site. Thank you for downloading. We hope you enjoy this feature! Didn't work? Try downloading again.