Indonesia | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Indonesia At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? No Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? No Legal Gender Recognition Possible? No LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? No Last Update: March 12, 2026 On January 2, 2026, Indonesia’s new penal code went into force after it was signed into law in December 2022. It penalizes all consensual extra-marital sex between adults with two years’ imprisonment. As same-sex marriage is not permitted, this effectively criminalizes all consensual same-sex sexual relations, though prosecution must be based on a complaint from the alleged offender’s spouse, parent, or child. Human rights activists have warned that this provision could be used to support societal policing of sexuality, fueling discrimination, intimidation, and violence. The vaguely worded 2016 National Pornography Act has also been used to target LGBTIQ people. Over the course of 2025, on the basis of this law, police conducted several raids of private gatherings that they described as “gay parties,” detaining 56 people in Jakarta , 75 people in Bogor , and 34 people in Surabaya . This law has also been used by authorities and internet service providers to block online LGBTIQ content , leading some LGBTIQ individuals to resort to self-censorship. Locally, a growing number of regions and cities have issued ordinances penalizing same-sex intimacy, “immoral behavior,” and public indecency. The province of Aceh , which operates under Shariah, criminalizes same-sex intimacy with punishments that include public floggings, imprisonment, hefty fines, and forced conversion practices. Many Indonesians believe that being gay or lesbian and accepting homosexuality go against religious norms and societal values . Negative media coverage and hostile political rhetoric , including calls for the criminalization of same-sex intimacy by religious leaders, have exacerbated negative public opinion. Lesbian, bisexual, and queer women are subjected to online gender-based violence in Indonesia, and the restrictive legal situation leaves victim-survivors without recourse to the law. Acceptance is slightly higher for transgender individuals , mainly because of the historical social role of the waria people, a third-gender community in Indonesia. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International