Benin | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Benin At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? No Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? No Legal Gender Recognition Possible? No LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? No Last Update: March 12, 2026 In Benin, same-sex relations are not criminalized. Discrimination based on sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, and sex characteristics is not prohibited, although the constitution imposes the duty on every citizen to “respect and consider his fellow man without discrimination of any kind.” Legal gender recognition is not possible. LGBTIQ people face stigma and discrimination from both the public and the police, which cracked down on a “ network of homosexuals ” in 2022. In a 2021 report, the Benin Human Rights Commission expressed concern about acts of physical and sexual assault, arbitrary detention, torture, and inhuman and degrading treatment against LGBTQI+ people. According to a study of six Western and Central African countries, including Benin, LBQ women rarely report discrimination and violence to the police, and 80 percent of those who do report choose to hide “their sexual orientation and/or gender identity in the hope of being treated fairly under the law.” According to a 2017 study, half of the trans people surveyed who had been subjected to assault did not seek remedies due to the absence or lack of awareness of these remedies. In 2023, during the UN Human Rights Council’s Universal Periodic Review of Benin, the government adopted two recommendations on ending discrimination against LGBTQI+ people and ensuring accountability for perpetrators of anti-LGBT+ violence. In another study, Benin was ranked 92nd out of 175 countries for the average social acceptance of LGBTIQ people between 2017 and 2020. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International