Colombia | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Colombia At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Legal Gender Recognition Possible? Yes LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? Yes Last Update: March 12, 2026 LGBTIQ people enjoy strong protection under the law. In 1999, the Constitutional Court issued rulings in two intersex-related cases that restricted physicians’ and parents’ ability to surgically “correct” the genitals of intersex children without their consent and that recognized intersex people as a minority group entitled to human rights protection. Same-sex marriage has been legal in Colombia since 2011, and in 2016, Colombia’s Constitutional Court made it illegal to refuse marriage registration for same-sex couples. Since 2015, same-sex couples have been allowed to adopt. The process for legal gender recognition was simplified in 2015 following a favorable court decision . Additionally, in March 2022, the Colombian Constitutional Court recognized third gender classifications for nonbinary individuals. Colombia made further strides toward legal recognition through the courts in 2025 , when the Constitutional Court ordered the Liga Antioqueña de Voleibol , a Colombian volleyball league regulator in Antioquia, to amend its policies that exclude trans people from its competitions. Colombia has legal protections against discrimination and harassment on the grounds of sexual orientation and gender identity. However, these legal protections have yet to translate into better investigation and sentencing of perpetrators of hate crimes. After concluding a fact-finding mission in 2025, the UN Independent Expert on protection against violence and discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity emphasized the stark disconnect between institutional progress and queer people’s daily lived experiences. The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights expressed concern about the 35 murders of LGBTI people documented by the Office of the Attorney General from January through May of 2025. In July 2023, Colombia broke ground when the Special Jurisdiction for Peace (JEP), a transitional justice tribunal, unveiled an indictment that charged 15 former rebels with war crimes and crimes against humanity targeting people of diverse sexual orientations and gender identities during Colombia’s decades-long internal armed conflict. In doing so, Colombia acknowledged conflict-driven violence against sexual and gender minorities as gender persecution, a crime against humanity recognized by the International Criminal Court and the JEP. Colombia’s National Action Plan on Women, Peace, and Security (2024-2034) champions inclusion by integrating sexual orientation, gender identity, and gender expression as key components across all thematic areas. In April 2024, lesbian activist Marcela Sánchez, the executive director of the NGO Colombia Diversa, addressed the UN Security Council. Her statement marked the first time in its 78-year history that the Security Council received a full briefing in a regular session on issues impacting LGBTQ people in a conflict setting. Public opinion and treatment of LGBTIQ people vary greatly across Colombia. The 2022 congressional election was a historic victory for representation as a record number of openly queer candidates won, increasing the number from two to seven. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International