Politics
Local
National
World
Arts & Entertainment
Financial
Photos
Opinions
Life Style
Noticias en Español
Classifieds
About
Archives
Print Edition
Find a Copy
Subscribe
Contact Us
Los Angeles Blade
Advertise with Us
Become A Blade Member
Connect with us
Washington Blade: LGBTQ News, Politics, LGBTQ Rights, Gay News
Argentina’s transgender community confronts ‘chaotic, desperate’ situation
FUND LGBTQ JOURNALISM
Donate
Politics Trump-appointed judge restores White House TV pool access  White House press pool pushes back after Trump bars three outlets Jeremy Moss looks to bring LGBTQ advocacy from Lansing to Capitol Hill LGBTQ issues, attacks on Democrats dominate unusual RNC midterm convention Ind. prosecutor declines to press charges over false Buttigieg child welfare complaint
Local Former Capital Pride board member reiterates sexual harassment allegation Center for Black Equity’s annual gala to take place Oct. 3 Charles Bowers, former owner of Baltimore gay bar the Hippo, dies Being a female firefighter comes with unique risks, and rewards Capital Pride chair resigns from board after just 10 months
D.C.
Maryland
Virginia
Delaware
Best of Gay DC
Photos
National Grace Meng sharply criticizes DOJ over hospital settlements Philadelphia event to launch 2026 LGBT History Month Dutch prime minister visits Stonewall Inn For lesbian victims of domestic violence, competent care is scare Long-time DignityUSA executive director announces retirement
World Colombia withdraws from Equal Rights Coalition Caso Karlina: Una sentencia histórica contra las terapias de «conversión» Dutch prime minister visits Stonewall Inn Spike in HIV cases prompts Fiji to declare national emergency UN human rights chief sounds alarm over ‘comprehensive onslaught’ against LGBTQ rights
Noticias en Español Caso Karlina: Una sentencia histórica contra las terapias de «conversión» Mujer trans salvadoreña es encontrada sin vida Realidad LGBTQ en Honduras: fuga o muerte Un terremoto también se vive desde el exilio Centenares de personas participan en la Marcha del Orgullo en la capital salvadoreña
Opinions Washington Blade responds to concerns over White House pool duties Young people should know history of the fight for human rights What LGBTQ veterans are building after ‘Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell’ Gun reform is an LGBTQ rights issue Trump’s Cabinet: Dumb, dumber, dumbest, and evil
Peter Rosenstein
Kate Clinton
Rick Rosendall
Kathi Wolfe
Brock Thompson
Mark Lee
A&E Tyler Clementi Foundation to host fundraiser in Rehoboth Calendar: September 25-October 1 ‘Star Trek: Strange New Worlds’ star Celia Rose Gooding breaks down that finale time travel twist Writing a play about Lincoln leads down a rabbit hole to a closet Clavicular charged in alleged rape of teenage influencer
Television All the queer things to watch this fall ‘Vampire Lestat’ heats up Pride month with queer action Repression, toxic masculinity fuel intense queer drama ‘Half Man’ Spring’s best in queer TV and film Netflix’s ‘The Boyfriend’ is more than a dating show
Dining Union Market’s Last Call Bar a welcoming oasis for all RAMMYs honors restaurant industry professionals Behind the bar with Moon Rabbit’s Thi Nguyen My Rehoboth Beach culinary tour New D.C. restaurants opening just in time for spring
Theater D.C.’s fall theater season is already well underway Actress takes on bisexual ‘Ma’ Rainey in new Round House production Immersive ‘Nation-State’ imagines a society free of authoritarianism New GALA show about WWII spy full of conflict, intrigue National tour of ‘The Notebook’ retains its tearjerking power
Film ‘Thelma and Louise’ remains landmark of unspoken queer rebellion ‘Here the Whole Time’ delivers queer coming-of-age comedy ‘Teenage Sex and Death’ has never been more entertaining Queer team brings girl power to fully baked ‘The Wrong Girls’ ‘Maddie’s Secret’ defies campy expectations
Music Queer mega stars coming to D.C. this fall DJ Chanel Santini is bringing the heat and some gender-fluid diversity to XBIZ Miami Gaga, Cardi B, and more to grace D.C. stages this spring Washington chorale kicks off Christmas with vibrant program Queer mega stars (and allies) ready to take D.C. stages this fall
Books Curl up with a good book this fall Dolly Parton biography puts her hardships into context Historiography with heart New book examines fashionista Audrey Smaltz’s fabulous life New book examines Trump cuts to LGBTQ healthcare
Photos PHOTOS: Shenandoah Valley Pride PHOTOS: Walk and 5K to End HIV PHOTOS: Wanda Alston Foundation Fall Reception PHOTOS: SMYAL Fall Brunch PHOTOS: SUNFESTIVAL
Best of Gay DC
Contests
Financial Moving presents a chance to ‘clean house’ With gas prices soaring again, a staycation is a good plan When buying a home, it’s decisions, decisions, decisions Under-the-radar Delaware beach towns smart buyers are targeting ‘Culture eats strategy for breakfast’
Health United States Conference on HIV/AIDS grapples with federal budget cuts AIDS Healthcare Foundation announces 3 million people globally in its care LGBTQ people, weed, and mental health: what you need to know UPDATED: Trans-led HIV clinic in Portsmouth struggles amid funding cuts Housewives head to Capitol Hill to promote PrEP coverage
News United States Conference on HIV/AIDS grapples with federal budget cuts AIDS Healthcare Foundation announces 3 million people globally in its care LGBTQ people, weed, and mental health: what you need to know UPDATED: Trans-led HIV clinic in Portsmouth struggles amid funding cuts Housewives head to Capitol Hill to promote PrEP coverage
Cannabis Culture LGBTQ people, weed, and mental health: what you need to know New Mexico guv signs marijuana legalization Delaware cannabis activists take on corporate marijuana Virginia marijuana legalization takes effect July 1 Highstream 420 Festival Livestream
Fitness NEW YEAR NEW YOU 2020: Local VIDA master trainer on trends, tips and technology at the gym Why a personalized diet can help you achieve better results Al Roker blasts Jillian Michaels for criticizing Keto diet Make 2019 your year for fitness Raising healthy adults starts now
Classifieds
About
Newsletter Sign-Up
Print Edition
Archives
Advertise
Los Angeles Blade
BECOME A MEMBER
Argentina
Argentina’s transgender community confronts ‘chaotic, desperate’ situation
President Javier Milei has implemented several anti-trans directives
Published 1 year ago on April 10, 2025
By Michael K. Lavers
From left: Florencia Guimaraes García and Alba Rueda , Argentina's former special envoy for LGBTQ rights, speak at Centro Cultural de la Cooperación in Buenos Aires, Argentina, on April 4, 2025. (Washington Blade photo by Michael K. Lavers)
Share
Tweet
Editor’s note: Washington Blade International News Editor Michael K. Lavers will be on assignment in Argentina through April 12.
BUENOS AIRES, Argentina — A group of Argentine transgender activists with whom the Blade spoke on April 4 said President Javier Milei’s policies have made their community even more vulnerable to violence, discrimination, and poverty.
“The situation is really chaotic, desperate,” said Florencia Guimaraes García, a travesti activist who is president of the House of Lohana and Diana Civil Association. “There is also a lot of fear among the trans and travestí community towards the government’s policies.”
Guimaraes’s group is named after Diana Sacayán, a prominent trans activist who was stabbed to death inside her Buenos Aires apartment in 2015, and Lohana Berkins, the founder of the Association for the Fight for Travesti and Transsexual Identity who died in 2016.
Guimaraes and three other trans activists — Julia Amore, Sasha Solano, and Daniela Ruíz — spoke with the Blade after they participated in a trans and travestí rights forum that took place at an LGBTQ cultural center in downtown Buenos Aires. Alba Rueda, the country’s former special envoy for LGBTQ rights, also took part.
“We are in a bad moment for the rights and quality of life of LGBTQ+ people,” Rueda told the Blade during a February 2024 interview.
Casa Rosada in Buenos Aires, Argentina (Washington Blade photo by Michael K. Lavers)
Milei took office on Dec. 10, 2023, after he defeated then-Economy Minister Sergio Massa in the second round of that year’s Argentina’s presidential election. Rueda resigned before Milei assumed the presidency.
Milei, an economist and former congressman, shortly after he took office eliminated the country’s Women, Gender and Diversity Ministry.
Milei last year closed the National Institute Against Discrimination, Xenophobia and Racism, a government agency known by the acronym INADI that provided support and resources to people who suffered discrimination based on sexual orientation, gender identity, and other factors. Milei in 2024 also dismissed trans people who the government hired under the Trans Labor Quota Law, which set aside at least 1 percent of public sector jobs for trans people.
Argentina’s landmark Gender Identity Law that, among other things, allows trans and nonbinary people to legally change their gender without medical intervention, took effect in 2012 when Cristina Fernández de Kirchner was president. Milei on Feb. 5 issued a decree that restricts minors’ access to gender-affirming surgeries and hormone treatments.
Gay Congressman Esteban Paulón, a long-time LGBTQ activist, filed a criminal complaint against Milei after he linked the LGBTQ community to pedophilia and made other homophobic and transphobic comments during a Jan. 23 speech at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland. Millions of people in Buenos Aires and across Argentina participated in marches against Milei that took place less than two weeks later.
From left: Gay Argentine Congressman Esteban Paulón and Argentine LGBT+ Federation President María Rachid march against Argentine President Javier Milei in Buenos Aires, Argentina, on Feb. 1, 2025. (Photo courtesy of Esteban Paulón)
Milei is among the heads of state who attended President Donald Trump’s inauguration. Milei also spoke at this year’s Conservative Political Action Conference in National Harbor, Md.
“Violence is more explicit, more common,” Guimares told the Blade, noting police violence has become more common against sex workers who are trans or travestí since Milei took office. Guimares added this situation is worse outside of Buenos Aires.
“The situation is different, depending on the location, and even more so in other provinces,” she said. “Even living in the province of Buenos Aires isn’t the same as living in Salta, or in Jujuy, or in Corrientes, or in provinces where the population is more conservative, where the discourse from the churches is much stronger, where all of this has a much crueler impact.”
“Milei’s discourse has legitimatized all of this,” added Guimaraes.
Amore said Argentina before Milei “had been a beacon” for human rights around the world.
“We’ve been building these laws with a lot of struggle, a lot of effort, with allies, and it wasn’t enough because we didn’t reach our goal,” she said. “These are very young. Our democracy is very young; we have a 40-year-old democracy and we are talking about a Gender Identity Law that is 12-years-old.
Amore added Milei is trying to erase trans and travestí people. Ruiz, an activist and actress who founded Siete Colores Diversidad, agreed.
“It is a cultural battle for us,” Ruiz told the Blade, referring for the continued struggle for trans and travestí rights in Argentina.
“It marks a cultural paradigm shift that we were carrying out day after day, making ourselves visible,” she added. “We carried it out by making ourselves politically visible, by presenting our travestí and trans Latin American visibility as a beacon to the world.”
The activists spoke with the Blade less than three months after Trump took office.
The American president, like Milei, has targeted the trans community with executive orders and policy directives. These include banning the State Department from issuing passports with “X” gender markers and prohibiting trans adults and young people from sports teams that correspond with their gender identity.
Solana, a trans woman from Peru who advocates on behalf of migrants, noted one of the first executive orders that Trump signed directed the federal government to only recognize two genders: Male and female.
“Man and woman. Period,” she said.
Guimares added Milei’s anti-LGBTQ discourse isn’t even his “original speech, but rather a line drawn from the U.S. government of Donald Trump and its agenda, which he established from the beginning and which he campaigned on as well.”
“This also follows in line with parties like Vox in Spain and other European countries, where we see how in Hungary, where an LGBTI Pride march (in Budapest) is now banned, and in other countries around the world where the population is having a really hard time,” said Guimaraes. “So, it’s not something original from Milei, but rather he’s taking part in those political agendas to generate strategies and alliances to be able to access economic resources.”
Amore, for her part, urged her American counterparts to continue the fight.
“Don’t let down your guard,” said Amore. “Organize. Come together. Speak out. Become visible in community. Respect the diversity of voices and put your own voices first and make yourselves more visible.”
Related Topics: Alba Rueda Argentina Association for the Fight for Travesti and Transsexual Identity Cristina Fernández de Kirchner Daniela Ruiz Diana Sacayán Donald Trump Esteban Paulón featured Florencia Guimares García House of Lohana and Diana Civil Association Hungary Javier Milei Julia Amore Lohana Berkins Sasha Solana Spain Vox
Up Next
Gay, nonbinary parent fights for family in Argentina’s courts
Don't Miss
LGBTQ seniors in Argentina face uncertain future
Advertisement
FUND LGBTQ JOURNALISM
SIGN UP FOR E-BLAST
Featured Local Savings
You may like
Grace Meng sharply criticizes DOJ over hospital settlements
Trump-appointed judge restores White House TV pool access
Colombia withdraws from Equal Rights Coalition
Argentina
Gay Argentine congressman loses bid for country’s Senate
Esteban Paulón is a long-time activist, vocal Javier Milei critic.
Published 11 months ago on October 28, 2025
By Michael K. Lavers
Esteban Paulón is one of Argentina's most prominent LGBTQ and intersex activists. (Photo courtesy of Esteban Paulón)
A gay man who ran for the Argentine Senate lost in the country’s midterm elections that took place on Sunday.
Congressman Esteban Paulón, a long-time LGBTQ rights activist who  has represented Santa Fe province in the country’s House of Deputies since 2023,  ran to represent Buenos Aires, the Argentine capital, as a member of the Movimiento de Jublidaos y Juventud or “Movement of Young People and Retirees” party.
Paulón’s party received .6 percent of the total votes in the city.
“A new space that wants to be part of the construction of a future of development, equality, and growth for Argentina was born today in Buenos Aires,” said Paulón on Monday in a social media post.
“I want to think all of the residents of Buenos Aires who put their confidence in the citizen movement and who think another way to do politics is possible,” he added. “We are not here to pass through, we are here to continue growing. We’re convinced that Argentina needs a better approach.”
The elections took place two years after President Javier Milei took office.
Milei has enacted a series of anti-LGBTQ policies that include the closure of Argentina’s National Institute Against Discrimination, Xenophobia, and Racism and dismissing transgender people who the previous government hired under the Trans Labor Quota Law, which set aside at least 1 percent of public sector jobs for trans people. Paulón earlier this year  filed  a criminal complaint against Milei after he linked the LGBTQ community to pedophilia and made other homophobic and transphobic comments during a speech at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland.
The Associated Press  notes  Milei’s La Libertad Avanza party on Sunday won 14 seats in the Senate and 64 seats in the Chamber of Deputies, which is the lower house of Congress. The election took place against the backdrop of the Trump-Vance administration’s promised $40 billion bailout for Argentina if Milei won.
Paulón, for his part, will remain in the Chamber of Deputies.
Continue Reading
Argentina
Argentine businesses promote inclusion in spite of anti-LGBTQ government policies
HRC Equidad Argentina 2025 report released in July
Published 1 year ago on September 3, 2025
By Esteban Rioseco
The HRC Equidad Argentina 2025 report notes a 27 percent increase in the number of businesses in the country that have LGBTQ-inclusive employment practices compared to the previous year. (Photo courtesy of HRC Equidad Argentina)
Argentina has reached a historic milestone in LGBTQ workplace inclusion.
Ninety-three organizations — including private companies, universities, and embassies — have implemented inclusive policies that now benefit 285,600 LGBTQ workers. This regional record stands in stark contrast to President Javier Milei’s dismantlement of public policies in this area — including the closure of the National Institute Against Discrimination, Xenophobia and Racism (INADI) and the Women, Gender, and Diversity Ministry.
The HRC Equidad Argentina 2025 report, which the Human Rights Campaign Foundation prepared with the LGBT+ Public Policy Institute, notes 60 organizations received the “Best Places to Work LGBT+” certification. This figure represents a 27 percent increase over the previous year.
In an economic context marked by inflation and recession, private companies are advancing where the state is retreating.
“At Equidad AR, we note this contradiction with concern: while the private sector is demonstrating a growing commitment to the inclusion of LGBT+ people in the workplace, the Argentine government has decided to defund, dismantle, or eliminate fundamental public policies on diversity,” said HRC Equidad AR Director Onax Cirlini. “Companies can make significant progress, but they cannot replace the role that the State should play as the guarantor of rights.”
The report comes at a time when Congress has approved an amendment to Argentina’s Basic Law that allows employers to fire their employees without cause. The measure could mean a major setback for the LGBTQ community: opening the door to terminations on discriminatory grounds and limiting financial compensation.
“This scenario, marked by the rise of hate speech and public policies that eliminate or restrict rights, has a direct impact on the working lives of LGBT+ people,” Cirlini noted. “It is not just a matter of good practices, but of active resistance to a model that weakens collective protections.”
Casa Rosada in Buenos Aires, Argentina, in April 2025. President Javier Milei’s government has curtailed LGBTQ rights since it took office in December 2023. (Washington Blade photo by Michael K. Lavers)
One of the most significant developments the report noted was the addition of 16 national universities to the index, reflecting the education system’s commitment to cultural transformation. Historically absent sectors also began to support these efforts in all of Argentina’s 24 provinces.
Persistent structural inequalities, however, remain an obstacle.
María Rachid, president of the Argentine LGBT Federation, said workplace inclusion requires much more than good business practices.
“Centuries of exclusion, marginalization, and violence against the trans community cannot be resolved even with a few years of public policies,” she said. “It will require a lot of time, continuity of these policies, and affirmative action such as the trans employment quota, which is not currently being implemented at the national level, and measures that the current government is not guaranteeing.”
Milei’s administration since it took office in 2023 has dismantled key equality structures: it eliminated the Women, Gender, and Diversity Ministry; closed INADI, and cut funding for inclusion programs. Rachid said this setback is due to ideological convictions, as opposed to current socioeconomic and political circumstances.
“The government is not interested in public inclusion policies,” she warned. “They are deeply convinced that the state should not develop them. Nor are they interested in the private sector doing so. If it were up to them, the private sector would not do so either.”
Continue Reading
Argentina
Two trans women document Argentina military dictatorship’s persecution
Carolina Boetti and Marzia Echenique arrested multiple times after 1976 coup
Published 1 year ago on June 3, 2025
By Michael K. Lavers
From left: Carolina Boetti and Marzia Echenique (Photo courtesy of Carolina Boetti and Marzia Echenique)
Editor’s note: Washington Blade International News Editor Michael K. Lavers was on assignment in Argentina and Uruguay from April 2-12, 2025.
ROSARIO, Argentina — Two transgender women in Argentina’s Santa Fe province are documenting the persecution of trans people that took place during the brutal military dictatorship that governed their country from 1976-1983.
Carolina Boetti and Marzia Echenique created the Travestí Trans Santa Fe Archive, which seeks to “create a collective memory,” in 2020. (“Travestí” is the Spanish word for “crossdresser.”)
The archive, among other things, includes interviews with trans women who the dictatorship arrested and tortured. The archive also contains photographs from that period.
The archive is not in a specific location, but Boetti and Echenique have given presentations at local schools and universities. They have also spoken at a museum in Rosario, the largest city in Santa Fe province that is roughly 200 miles northwest of Buenos Aires, the Argentine capital, that honors the dictatorship’s victims.
Boetti and Echenique during an April 11 interview at a Rosario hotel said they are trying to raise funds that would allow them to digitize the archive and house it in a permanent location.
“We have this material that is fantastic,” said Boetti.
The Associated Press notes human rights groups estimate the dictatorship killed or forcibly disappeared upwards of 30,000 people in what became known as the “dirty war.” The dictatorship specifically targeted students, journalists, labor union leaders, and anyone else who it thought posed a threat.
The dictatorship first detained Echenique in 1979 when she was 16. She said it targeted her and other trans women because they were “not within that strict” binary of man and woman.
“There was a dictator during the dictatorship, and he dictated this binarism, and there was no other way than man or woman,” Echenique told the Blade. “Everything else was penalized, deprived of all rights. They took away everything.”
Boetti was 15 when the dictatorship first detained her.
“They detained me because of my sexual orientation,” she told the Blade. “Homosexuality in those years was penalized under the law.”
Boetti said the law in 1982 — the year when she began her transition — penalized crossdressing, prostitution and vagrancy with up to 120 days in jail. Boetti told the Blade that authorities “constantly detained me” from 1982 until she left Argentina in the 1990s.
Echenique said the regime once detained her for six months.
“The way of living, of studying, of walking freely down the street, of living somewhere, of sitting down to eat something in a bar or how we are sitting today, for example, was unthinkable in those years,” she said.
Echenique left Argentina in 1988, three years after the dictatorship ended. She returned to the country in 2006.
“The dictatorship ended in ’83, but not for the trans community,” she said.
Rosario and Santa Fe, the provincial capital, in 2018 implemented a reparation policy for trans people who suffered persecution under the dictatorship. They remain the only cities in Argentina with such a program.
Boetti on May 17, 2018, during an International Day Against Homophobia, Biphobia, and Transphobia ceremony over which then-Santa Fe Gov. Miguel Lifshitz presided became the first trans person in Argentina to receive reparations. Boetti receives a monthly pension of ARG 40,000 ($34.48) and a monthly stipend that pays for her health care.
Those who have received reparations successfully presented evidence to a judge that proved they suffered persecution and repression during the dictatorship. Boetti and Echenique pointed out that only 10 of the 50 trans women in Santa Fe who the dictatorship are known to have persecuted are still alive.
Carolina Boetti in 1985 (Photo courtesy of Carolina Boetti)
Post-dictatorship Argentina became global trans rights leader
Then-President Cristina Fernández de Kirchner in 2012 signed Argentina’s landmark Gender Identity Law that, among other things, allows trans and nonbinary people to legally change their gender without medical intervention. The country in 2010 extended marriage rights to same-sex couples.
Then-President Alberto Fernández, who is unrelated to Cristina Fernández, in 2020 signed the Trans Labor Quota Law, which set aside at least 1 percent of public sector jobs for trans people. Fernández in 2021 issued a decree that allowed nonbinary Argentines to choose an “X” gender marker on their National Identity Document or DNI.
A poster inside the Argentine Congress in Buenos Aires, Argentina, on April 3, 2025, reads, “Treating a trans woman as a man and a trans man as a woman is an act of violence.” (Washington Blade photo by Michael K. Lavers)
Alba Rueda, a trans woman and well-known activist, in 2022 became Argentina’s special envoy for LGBTQ and intersex rights.
President Javier Milei has implemented several anti-trans measures since he took office in December 2023. These include a decree that restricts minors’ access to gender-affirming surgeries and hormone treatment and the dismissal of trans people who the government hired under the Trans Labor Quota Law.
Milei closed  the National Institute Against Discrimination, Xenophobia, and Racism, a government agency known by the acronym INADI that provided support and resources to people who suffered discrimination based on sexual orientation, gender identity, and other factors. He also eliminated Argentina’s Women, Gender, and Diversity Ministry under which Rueda worked until Fernández left office.
From left: Florencia Guimaraes García and Alba Rueda , Argentina’s former special envoy for LGBTQ rights, speak at Centro Cultural de la Cooperación in Buenos Aires, Argentina, on April 4, 2025. (Washington Blade photo by Michael K. Lavers)
Gay Congressman Esteban Paulón, a long-time LGBTQ activist, in January  filed  a criminal complaint against Milei after he linked the LGBTQ community to pedophilia and made other homophobic and transphobic comments during a speech at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland. Paulón is among those who attended the 2018 ceremony during which Boetti received her reparations.
Echenique noted the restoration of democracy in Argentina did not end anti-trans discrimination and persecution in the country.
“We came from the period of the dictatorship, but we do not forget that everything didn’t end then,” she said. “The persecutions were worse than what we suffered during the period of the dictatorship once democracy returned.”
A poster in an LGBTQ bar in Buenos Aires, Argentina, on April 5, 2025, reads “enough of the trans and travestí genocide.” (Washington Blade photo by Michael K. Lavers)
Boetti said she does not think Argentina will once again become a dictatorship under Milei.
“But unfortunately, there is a lot of harassment and a lot of hate speech,” said Boetti.
“There are now laws that protect us, but there is a fight for sure,” added Echenique. “I don’t think we’ll go back to how things were before, and that’s why I again emphasize the importance of archiving memory in this.”
Continue Reading
Advertisement
Latest
Popular
Out & About 3 hours ago
Tyler Clementi Foundation to host fundraiser in Rehoboth
Calendar 3 hours ago
Calendar: September 25-October 1
District of Columbia 4 hours ago
Former Capital Pride board member reiterates sexual harassment allegation
New York 5 hours ago
Grace Meng sharply criticizes DOJ over hospital settlements
Television 7 hours ago
‘Star Trek: Strange New Worlds’ star Celia Rose Gooding breaks down that finale time travel twist
Photos 5 days ago
PHOTOS: Wanda Alston Foundation Fall Reception
Photos 5 days ago
PHOTOS: Walk and 5K to End HIV
Photos 4 days ago
PHOTOS: Shenandoah Valley Pride
White House 4 days ago
White House press pool pushes back after Trump bars three outlets
National 4 days ago
Long-time DignityUSA executive director announces retirement
Advertisement
Sign Up for Weekly E-Blast
Advertisement
Popular
Photos 5 days ago
PHOTOS: Wanda Alston Foundation Fall Reception
Photos 5 days ago
PHOTOS: Walk and 5K to End HIV
Photos 4 days ago
PHOTOS: Shenandoah Valley Pride
White House 4 days ago
White House press pool pushes back after Trump bars three outlets
About
Advertise
Contact Us
Find A Copy
Classifieds
Privacy Policy
Terms of Service
RSS Syndication
© Copyright Brown, Naff, Pitts Omnimedia, Inc. 2021. All rights reserved | Powered by Keynetik .