UN experts warn revised UK Equality Act puts transgender people at risk - JURIST - News DONATE NOW News ▾ All Legal News US Legal News World Legal News This Day @ Law Dispatches ▾ All Dispatches Afghanistan Canada EU Ghana India Iran Israel Italy Kazakhstan Kenya Myanmar Pakistan Peru Romania Sri Lanka Taiwan UK Ukraine US Commentary ▾ All Commentary Faculty Commentary Professional Commentary Student Commentary Features ▾ All Features Explainers Long Reads Multimedia Interviews Topics Rule of Law ▾ Materials Podcasts About ▾ FAQ Staff Awards Apply Journalist in Residence Board of Directors Contact Us Donate ▾ Why Support JURIST? Donate Honor Roll Search: Search News Filmbetrachter / Pixabay UN experts warn revised UK Equality Act puts transgender people at risk Samara Baboolal | JURIST Staff, GB August 18, 2026 05:20:25 am United Nations experts warned on Monday that the UK’s revisions to the Equality Act 2010 risk discriminating against and excluding transgender people. The UN human rights experts warned that the updated Code of Practice essentially advises service providers that “a women’s service must either exclude transgender women or admit men” and vice versa. The experts cautioned that this “effectively presents exclusion as a means of” legal compliance, and may lead to institutionalized discrimination. The updated Code of Practice for Services, Public Functions, and Associations became statutory on August 5. The code’s “[j]ustification for separate and single-sex services” includes §13.119 and §13.122, which outline: The impact on those who will be excluded from the service includes both the impact on people of the opposite sex generally and the particular impact on trans people of the opposite sex. In separate or single-sex services, a trans man will be excluded from the men-only service because his sex is female, and a trans woman will be excluded from the women-only service because her sex is male. Trans people are likely to be disadvantaged by this, by comparison to people who are not trans. In many cases, it will be proportionate to take a holistic approach to service provision by providing a mix of services which may include both separate or single-sex services and mixed-sex services. The Code of Practice also clarifies that, for the purpose of the act, “a person’s sex remains their biological sex, whether they have a Gender Recognition Certificate (GRC) or not.” However, transgender people are protected against association, perception, and sex based-discrimination, as well as direct and indirect gender reassignment discrimination. In February 2026, UN experts released a joint statement arguing that the draft Code of Practice was incompatible with international human rights, including the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , the European Convention on Human Rights , and the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women . On August 5, 2026, the Good Law Project announced its support for a legal challenge against the Code of Practice, on the grounds that it will have a discriminatory and exclusionary impact on transgender people. The Good Law Project argued that the Code of Practice appears to “ignore” the UK High Court decision allowing services to provide transgender women with inclusive facilities. The UN urged the UK government and the Equality and Human Rights Commission to ensure that the statutory guidance does not incite discrimination, and stressed the importance of equally protecting the rights of women, girls, transgender, gender-diverse, and intersex persons. GET OUR DAILY DIGEST Email Address Subscribe Key: Subscribe Latest DISPATCHES Pakistan dispatch: Supreme Court defers jailed former PM’s medical case amid jurisdictional dispute Taiwan dispatch: motion for retrial filed over 2000 execution amid miscarriage of justice concerns Latest COMMENTARY Can the US Keep a Diplomat Out of the UN? by Matthew R. Morley | Morley & Associates | US | Russia The Rule of Law Has Been Miserable to Measure. That Just Changed. by David Stasior | Broken Scales Latest FEATURES ‘Accountability Is Deferred Rather Than Delivered’ — Conflict Resolution Scholar Johannes Langer on Mediation, Amnesty, and the Limits of the ICC ‘Genocide denial is often a state project’ — Iva Vukušić on Srebrenica and the politics of memory THIS DAY @ LAW Warren Commission report on the Kennedy assassination released On September 27, 1964, the report of the Warren Commission chaired by Chief Justice Earl Warren on the Kennedy assassination was released. The report essentially concluded that Lee Harvey Oswald had acted alone. Review the Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy . WWII Axis Powers formed On September 27, 1940, Chancellor Adolf Hitler of Germany, Foreign Minister Galeazzo Ciano of Italy and Ambassador Saburo Kurusu of Japan signed the Tripartite Pact , creating the World War II alliance of the Axis Powers. The Pact was later assented to by other members of the Axis, including Hungary, Romania, Croatia, Slovakia, Bulgaria, and the Kingdom of Yugoslavia. Home Attributions Disclaimer Privacy Policy Contact Us Copyright © 2026, JURIST Legal News & Research Services, Inc. JURISTnews is a collaboration with the University of Pittsburgh