ECtHR: ICJ and partners intervene in a case against Malta concerning a transgender asylum seeker’s risk of persecution and arbitrary detention | ICJ Donate to the ICJ By donating to the ICJ, you are actively participating in creating a just society. I want to help Home News & Advocacy Resource hub Current publications & practitioner tools Archive EU: Standards and Case-law on (alternatives to) detention of migrant children About The Commission Staff Work with us How we work Standard setting & normative development Research & fact finding Advocacy & strategic litigation Capacity strengthening Developing practitioner tools & guides Issues Accountability Business & human rights Civil, political, economic, social & cultural rights Digital rights & AI Disability rights Environmental rights Independence of judges & lawyers Sexual orientation & gender identity Women’s human rights United Nations Regions Africa Asia & Pacific Europe & Central Asia ICJ European Institutions Latin America Middle East & North Africa Impact Partners Sections & affiliates Networks Funders OpinioJuris website Donate $ ECtHR: ICJ and partners intervene in a case against Malta concerning a transgender asylum seeker’s risk of persecution and arbitrary detention 30 Jul 2025 | Advocacy , Cases , Legal submissions , News , Web Stories On 23 July 2025, the International Commission of Jurists (ICJ), the AIRE Centre, the European Council on Refugees and Exiles, the Dutch Council for Refugees, Trans Europe and Central Asia and the European Region of the International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and Intersex Association (ILGA-Europe) submitted written observations in the case of M.S. v. Malta pending before the European Court of Human Rights. In this case, an LGBTI asylum seeker was detained upon arrival in Malta in April 2023 and, in May 2024, was issued with a return decision and a removal order to Bangladesh, a country where consensual same-sex conduct is criminalized and protections against discrimination are lacking. The joint observations raise serious concerns under Articles 3 (torture prohibition), 5 (right to liberty) and 13 (right to an effective remedy) of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR). They focus, in particular, on: (i) the non-refoulement principle – namely, the obligation under international law, including the ECHR, to refrain from transferring individuals to States or places where there is a real risk of a violation of their rights under Article 3 ECHR, among others; (ii) the detention conditions for asylum seekers; (iii) the individualized assessment required prior to resorting to immigration detention; (iv) the lawfulness and necessity criteria for immigration detention; and (v) the effectiveness of remedies against it. The interveners argue that, prior to any removal, Malta’s asylum procedures must ensure that the individual concerned will not face a real risk of treatment prohibited under Article 3 ECHR in the destination country, taking into account the specific risks faced by lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) persons. They further point to the risk of arbitrary detention without a proper individual vulnerability assessment, which may result in degrading treatment. The interveners submit that laws and regulations directly or indirectly criminalizing consensual same-sex conduct violate rights guaranteed by the ECHR and have a persecutory character on account of people’s real or imputed sexual orientation. The interveners submit that Contracting Parties must ensure not only that a remedy against detention is available, but that it is effective in practice. Furthermore, detention conditions must be dignified and take account of the specific needs of vulnerable detainees, including LGBTI asylum seekers. The interveners affirm that Contracting Parties must ensure that detention is not arbitrary, that alternative measures have been considered before resorting to immigration detention and found to be inadequate, and that detention is only used as a measure of last resort. Council of Europe institutions have repeatedly emphasised that individual assessments must be conducted, particularly, in light of asylum seekers’ inherent vulnerability and to allow additional vulnerabilities, if any, to be identified and addressed. The interveners submit that for individuals to benefit from their right to challenge the lawfulness of detention under Article 5(4) ECHR, they must be informed of the reasons for their detention, have access to legal representation, all relevant documents and be heard in person. Review procedures must consider all relevant facts invoked by the detainee and must be conducted promptly. The interveners submit that Contracting Parties must act in accordance with their obligations under European Union (EU) law, particularly those arising from the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights (CFR), the Reception Conditions Directive (RCD) and the Return Directive. These include the requirement that detention be a measure of last resort, following an individual assessment, and subject to due diligence. International obligations in respect of detention and removal, such as the prohibition of arbitrary detention under the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the non-refoulement principle under the United Nations Convention Against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (UN CAT) must also be applied consistently. Read the full intervention here . For more information, please contact: Karolína Babická, Senior Legal Adviser at karolina.babicka@icj.org Recent News HRC63: ICJ Raises Concern over Torture, Executions and Impunity in Libya 23 Sep 2026 HRC63: ICJ Calls for Renewal and Strengthening of the Venezuela Fact-Finding Mission 21 Sep 2026 Joint Statement: Attacks on the Rule of Law, Judicial Independence and Access to Justice in Zambia 17 Sep 2026 HRC63: ICJ Raises Concern over Widespread and Systematic Arbitrary Detention in Egypt 16 Sep 2026 ← Previous Next → Donate to the ICJ By donating to the ICJ, you are actively participating in creating a just society. I want to help Stay informed Sign up to for news updates, information on our advocacy, and upcoming events. Company This field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged. First name (Required) Email (Required) Organization Subscribe Address & Registration ICJ – International Commission of Jurists Postal address: Case Postale 1211 Geneva 1, Switzerland Physical address: Rue des Buis 3 1202 Geneva, Switzerland The ICJ is registered in the Canton of GE under CHE-107.751.792 Contact info (dot) icj (at) icj (dot) org Switzerland office: +41 (0)22 979 38 00 Thailand office: +66 261 984 77 Nepal office: AsiaPacific (at) icj (dot) org Belgium office: +32 2 734 84 46 ECA (at) icj (dot) org Tunisia office: +216 71 962 287 Africa (at) icj (dot) org Latinamerica (at) icj (dot) org Reporting unethical conduct by an ICJ person The ICJ expects a high standard of ethical conduct from all those who represent the organisation. If you have a concern or complaint, please use our dedicated Whistleblowing Channel. Create a report © 2025 ICJ. All Rights Reserved. Site by Pomegranite Privacy policy | Cookie policy Translate » < < < < Manage Cookie Consent 🍪 We use cookies on our website to improve your experience. By clicking "Accept all", you consent to the use of all the cookies. If you'd like to control which cookies we use, please visit "Cookie settings". To find out more, read our privacy policy and cookie policy . Functional Functional Always active The technical storage or access is strictly necessary for the legitimate purpose of enabling the use of a specific service explicitly requested by the subscriber or user, or for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission of a communication over an electronic communications network. Preferences Preferences The technical storage or access is necessary for the legitimate purpose of storing preferences that are not requested by the subscriber or user. Statistics Statistics The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for statistical purposes. The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for anonymous statistical purposes. Without a subpoena, voluntary compliance on the part of your Internet Service Provider, or additional records from a third party, information stored or retrieved for this purpose alone cannot usually be used to identify you. Marketing Marketing The technical storage or access is required to create user profiles to send advertising, or to track the user on a website or across several websites for similar marketing purposes. Manage options Manage services Manage {vendor_count} vendors Read more about these purposes Accept all Deny all Cookie settings Save cookie settings Cookie settings {title} {title} {title} Manage consent