Paraguay will 'burn books' which don't promote 'traditional gender ideology' | PinkNews About Us Advertise Work with us Login Register Latest News View all UK US World Health Politics Sport Business Culture View all TV Film Celebrity Drag Theatre Music Gaming Lifestyle View all Beauty Careers Fashion Relationships Travel Shopping View all Deals Recommended Fashion & Beauty Tickets Video View all News & Politics Entertainment Lifestyle Discover Trans Awareness Week Drag Race Explainers The Queer Agenda Toggle menu Account Register Login Current Affairs Paraguay will ‘burn books’ which don’t promote ‘traditional gender ideology’ Oct 20 2017 Written by Jem Collins Share Save for later Comment Schools in Paraguay will no longer be able to teach an LGBT inclusive curriculum, after changes announced by the Government. The Ministry of Education has banned all public schools from using or spreading materials on “gender ideology”, saying the idea that “gender is a social construct” was problematic. “We naturally respect different options,” Education Minister Enrique Riera told reporters at a press conference, according to ABC Colour . “But we’re not going to instill them in our public schools.” He went on to stress the Government recognises “traditional values” and “traditional families” – namely those consisting of a “father, mother and children”. Queer News. Straight Up. The LGBTQ+ stories you don’t want to miss, delivered to your inbox daily. Email address required Must be valid email Register By registering you agree to our Privacy Policy Thanks for registering! You can update your email subscriptions at any time in the My profile section of your account. The politician even went as far to say that he would burn any books that spread “gender ideology”. LGBT organisations have been quick to condemn the move, saying it was a phrase “invented” by conservative pressure groups. “[This idea has been] invented by conservative groups to keep justifying violence and discrimination against women and LGBTI people,” they added. Amnesty International has also slammed the move, calling it an “extremely dangerous backwards step.” Americas Director Erika Guevara Rosas added: “Under cover of the malicious expression ‘gender ideology’, what is really happening here is the suppression of education about equality and discrimination, which is an international obligation of the Paraguayan state – not an ideology. “Excluding education on equality from the curriculum is tantamount to state promotion of violence and discrimination, with extremely grave consequence.” “This decision represents an extremely dangerous backward step for human rights in the country. Paraguay’s President Horacio Cartes (Image: Inti Ocon/AFP/Getty Images) While it isn’t illegal to be gay in Paraguay, same-sex couples are unable to get married and there is no protection in law for LGBT people. In 2013 the country’s newly elected President, who is still in post, was forced to apologise after saying he would shoot himself if his son was gay. Businessman Horacio Cartes had previously said he would “shoot himself in the testicles” if his son married another man. He later told reporters: “I have no shame in apologising to those who felt offended for an expression of mine with respect to same-sex marriage.” Nov 29 2023 56 celebrities you didn’t know are gay, bisexual or lesbian He has also previously compared gay people to monkeys . More: Americas Related articles Latest News Previous Next Celebrity Sep 25 Trans influencer calls out Nikki Glaser for stand-up joke about what’s ‘in her pants’ Culture Sep 25 Trans pro wrestling trailblazer Gisele Shaw signs exclusive NWA contract Bisexual Sep 25 The Traitors star Freddie Fraser’s mum’s emotional response to his coming out Celebrity Sep 25 Lili Reinhart says Hollywood ‘too afraid’ to greenlight lesbian vampire project Celebrity Sep 25 Carly Rae Jepsen describes moment Heated Rivalry inspired her son’s name Celebrity Sep 25 John Green ‘heartbroken’ for trans Harry Potter fans as he talks JK Rowling Current Affairs Sep 25 JD Vance claims James Talarico has a “weird obsession with children in drag” News Sep 25 Susan Sarandon, Hannah Einbinder and Caleb Hearon detained outside UN after protesting Netanyahu What to buy now Previous Next Fashion Mar 27 Connor Ives and MAC team up to re-release the iconic ‘Protect The Dolls’ t-shirt Music Mar 12 The Pussycat Dolls confirm reunion with new single and tour – how to get tickets Music Jan 23 A full guide to the 2026 Harry Styles Together, Together tour including dates and presale info Shopping Nov 24 2025 Ten truly awesome Christmas gifts you can buy to support queer-owned businesses Trans Sep 09 2025 Lush creates ‘luxurious’ trans flag bath bomb to support trans charities Tickets Jun 25 2025 Dolly Parton announces mini Las Vegas residency after wrapping her last tour almost a decade ago Shopping May 15 2025 LEGO celebrates late gay icon Keith Haring with new art set: ‘Want this so bad’ Music Apr 18 2025 Primavera Sound’s most iconic queer performances, from Troye Sivan to Ethel Cain Exclusive Previous Next Exclusive Sep 11 Ania Magliano talks SNL UK season two and anti-LGBTQ voices in comedy: ‘We do edgy in the right way’ Exclusive Sep 11 Elliot Tuttle on Blue Film’s personal inspiration, rejection and taboo: ‘It’s about loneliness’ Exclusive Sep 09 OF star Andy Lee on love for gay fans, ‘poisonous’ creators and ‘harmful’ stunts: ‘Gay men lift me up every day’ Exclusive Sep 07 Real Housewives of London spill the tea: ‘She’d go to the opening of a packet of crisps’ Opinion Sep 04 Katseye in London: A showcase of real talent deserving of the deafening screams Exclusive Sep 02 Adrian Chiarella and Joe Bird on tackling conversion therapy in gay horror Leviticus Exclusive Aug 21 Sziget Festival drag and circus troupe want audiences to feel like family Exclusive Aug 20 Gay wrestler Anthony Bowens says Heated Rivalry shows authentic life of closeted athletes Register to save articles and more. It'll only take a minute and it's free. JOIN US TODAY! Already have an account? Log in here "/> Download the PinkNews app Award winning LGBTQ+ journalism About us Editorial Policy Contact us Advertise Work for us Terms and conditions Privacy policy Privacy manager Privacy Manager