Court of Appeal for Saskatchewan
Docket: CACV4329

Citation: Saskatchewan (Minister of
Education) v UR Pride Centre for Sexuality
and Gender Diversity, 2025 SKCA 74

Between:
Government of Saskatchewan as represented by the Minister of Education
Appellant
(Respondent/Applicant)

And
UR Pride Centre for Sexuality and Gender Diversity
Respondent
(Applicant/Respondent)

And
The Advocates’ Society, Amnesty International Canadian Section (English
Speaking), Attorney General for New Brunswick, Attorney General of Alberta,
British Columbia Civil Liberties Association, Canadian Civil Liberties Association,
John Howard Society of Saskatchewan, Justice for Children and Youth,
Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, Canadian Union of Public Employees,
Canadian Teachers’ Federation, Trial Lawyers Association of British Columbia,
Women’s Legal Education and Action Fund Inc.
Intervenors
(Non-parties)

Before:

Leurer C.J.S., Jackson, Caldwell, Schwann and Tholl JJ.A.

Disposition:

Appeal allowed in part

Written reasons by:
In concurrence:

The Honourable Chief Justice Robert W. Leurer
The Honourable Justice Georgina R. Jackson
The Honourable Justice Lian M. Schwann
The Honourable Justice Jerome A. Tholl
The Honourable Justice Neal W. Caldwell

In dissent:

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

Date: 2025-08-11

2024 SKKB 23, Regina
September 23–24, 2024

Counsel:

Deron Kuski, K.C., Milad Alishahi and Bennet Misskey for the
Appellant
Adam Goldenberg, Ljiljana Stanic, Bennett Jensen, Eric Freeman and
Sean Sinclair for the Respondent
Isabel Lavoie Daigle and Rose Campbell for the Attorney General for
New Brunswick
Nathaniel Gartke and David Kamal for the Attorney General of Alberta
Avnish Nanda and Dr. Anna Lund for the British Columbia Civil
Liberties Association
Leif Jensen and Dan LeBlanc for the Canadian Civil Liberties
Association
Brendan MacArthur-Stevens, Casey Stiemer and Brooke Mantei for
The Advocates’ Society
Allison Williams and Mary Birdsell for Justice for Children and Youth
Pierre Hawkins for the John Howard Society of Saskatchewan
Steven Barrett, Melanie Anderson, Adriel Weaver and Char Wiseman
for the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, Canadian Union of
Public Employees, and Canadian Teachers’ Federation
Dahlia Shuhaibar and Gib van Ert for Amnesty International Canadian
Section (English Speaking)
Morgan Camley and Kay Scorer for Women’s Legal Education and
Action Fund Inc.
Devin Eeg and Aubin Calvert for the Trial Lawyers Association of
British Columbia

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

On appeal from:
Appeal heard:

Page 1

I.

OVERVIEW

[1]

The Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms guarantees enumerated rights and

freedoms, subject only to such reasonable limits prescribed by law as can be demonstrably justified
in a free and democratic society. The Charter is part of Canada’s Constitution and, therefore, any
law inconsistent with it “is, to the extent of the inconsistency, of no force or effect” (Constitution
Act, 1982, s 52(1), being Schedule B to the Canada Act 1982 (UK), 1982, c 11).
[2]

However, it is also a central part of Canada’s constitutional architecture that Parliament

and the Legislatures are entitled to the last word on the operation (l’effet) of legislation in the face
of certain Charter rights. This feature is found in s. 33 of the Charter, which allows Parliament or
a provincial legislature to declare that an Act or a provision thereof shall operate notwithstanding
a provision included in s. 2 or ss. 7 to 15 of the Charter. The principal issue in this appeal is
whether, when such a declaration is made, there remains a role for the courts to determine if
Charter rights have been limited.
[3]

This proceeding arises in the context of the use of s. 33 in connection with s. 197.4 of The

Education Act, 1995, SS 1995, c E-0.2 [Education Act]. This provision, added to the Education
Act by The Education (Parents’ Bill of Rights) Amendment Act, 2023, SS 2023, c 46, s 4
[Amendment Act], requires the consent of a parent or guardian before teachers and other employees
of a school can use a new gender-related preferred name or gender identity of a pupil under
16 years of age.
[4]

Section 197.4(3) of the Education Act relies on s. 33(1) of the Charter to declare that

s. 197.4 is to “operate notwithstanding sections 2, 7 and 15 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and
Freedoms”. According to s. 33(3) of the Charter, unless it is renewed, this declaration “shall cease
to have effect five years after it comes into force or on such earlier date as may be specified in the
declaration”. No party to this appeal questions the Legislature’s authority to enact s. 197.4 or the
immunity that s. 197.4(3) bestows on s. 197.4 from the invalidating effect of a declaration of
inconsistency under s. 52 of the Constitution Act, 1982 – for the five-year period of the declaration.

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

Leurer C.J.S.

Page 2

[5]

Section 197.4 of the Education Act replaced a policy that the Ministry of Education had

previously adopted [Policy]. In the summer of 2023, the UR Pride Centre for Sexuality and Gender
Diversity [UR Pride] commenced an action against the Government of Saskatchewan as

15(1) of the Charter. After the Amendment Act was passed, UR Pride applied to amend its
originating application to include a request for a declaration that s. 197.4 limits the rights of gender
diverse students under ss. 7, 12 and 15(1) of the Charter, as well as for other relief. Over the
Government’s opposition, a Court of King’s Bench judge granted these amendments. The judge
also dismissed several applications by the Government seeking to put an immediate end to
UR Pride’s action: UR Pride Centre for Sexuality and Gender Diversity v Saskatchewan (Minister
of Education), 2024 SKKB 23, [2024] 11 WWR 75 [Chambers Decision].
[6]

The Government appeals from the Chambers Decision. It asserts that the Legislature’s

invocation of s. 33 nullifies the jurisdiction of the Court of King’s Bench to determine whether
s. 197.4 of the Education Act limits the rights of any person under ss. 7 and 15(1) of the Charter.
It also says that it is not open to UR Pride to assert that the provision violates s. 12 of the Charter.
Finally, the Government maintains that the repeal of the Policy makes the challenge to it moot.
[7]

Section 33 of the Charter does not have the effect the Government ascribes to it. Section 33

accomplishes what it says: for the period covered by a s. 33 declaration, the Act or provision
subject to it, in this case s. 197.4 of the Education Act, “shall have such operation as it would have
but for the provision of [the] Charter referred to in the declaration” (s. 33(2)). In other words,
s. 33(2) enables the Act or provision to operate regardless of whether it unreasonably limits a
specified Charter right or freedom, by suspending the invalidating effect of s. 52 of the
Constitution Act, 1982. A declaration made pursuant to s. 33 does not mean that the Act or
provision does not limit the referenced Charter right or freedom – here being ss. 2, 7 and 15(1) of
the Charter – nor does it nullify the jurisdiction of the Court of King’s Bench to issue a declaration
to that effect.
[8]

In this Court, the Government’s opposition to the amendments requested by UR Pride to

its originating application is premised on the suggestion that they amount to an abuse of process,

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

represented by the Minister of Education [Government] alleging that the Policy violated ss. 7 and

Page 3

which they are not. Accordingly, there is no basis to interfere with the judge’s decision to grant

[9]

Two points must be emphasized about these conclusions.

[10]

First, the parties to this appeal have raised the important, but narrow, question of whether

the Court of King’s Bench has the jurisdiction to issue a declaration should it find that s. 197.4 of
the Education Act limits the rights of any person under ss. 7 and 15 of the Charter. However, the
decision of whether to grant such declaratory relief is discretionary. This judgment does not decide
if that discretion should be exercised. Stated more clearly, while the Court of King’s Bench has
the power to answer the question of whether s. 197.4 limits ss. 7 and 15 Charter rights, it is left to
that Court to determine if it should do so.
[11]

Second, and flowing from the last statement, this judgment does not determine that s. 197.4

of the Education Act operates in a way that limits any person’s Charter rights. The Government
has not conceded this point. However, as that issue is not before the Court, these reasons do not
address it.
[12]

Finally, while I disagree with the Government about the effect of the s. 33(1) declaration

found in s. 197.4(3) of the Education Act, I agree with one important argument that it has made.
The revocation of the Policy, coupled with the absence of any allegation or evidence that any
person has suffered harm because of it, renders the challenge to the Policy moot. For these reasons,
all claims for relief in relation to the Policy must be struck from UR Pride’s originating application.
[13]

In sum, UR Pride’s originating application may be amended to request a declaration that

s. 197.4 of the Education Act limits the rights of persons under ss. 7, 12 and 15(1) of the Charter.
The Court of King’s Bench has the jurisdiction to determine whether s. 197.4 limits the rights of
persons under ss. 7 and 15(1) of the Charter and to issue a declaratory judgment, should it so
choose. Since s. 197.4(3) does not say that s. 197.4 operates notwithstanding s. 12 of the Charter,
UR Pride may also seek a declaration that s. 197.4 is of no force or effect because it results in a
violation of that Charter right. However, the parts of UR Pride’s originating application seeking
to have the Policy declared to be unconstitutional must be struck. So qualified, UR Pride’s
litigation may continue in the Court of King’s Bench.

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

permission to UR Pride to make those amendments.

Page 4

BACKGROUND
A.

[14]

The Policy and the Amendment Act

The Policy, titled “Use of Preferred First Name and Pronouns by Students”, was adopted

by the Government on August 22, 2023. Among other things, it required that a school obtain the
consent of a parent or guardian for educators to use a preferred name, gender identity or gender
expression of a student under the age of 16.
[15]

Nine days later, on August 31, 2023, UR Pride initiated a constitutional challenge to the

Policy. In its original form, UR Pride’s originating application sought a declaration that the Policy
limited the right to security of the person, as guaranteed by s. 7 of the Charter, and the right to
equality, as guaranteed by s. 15(1) of the Charter, and that such violations cannot be justified
pursuant to s. 1 of the Charter. UR Pride also requested a declaration that the Policy is of no force
or effect pursuant to s. 52(1) of the Constitution Act, 1982.
[16]

On September 28, 2023, the judge enjoined the implementation and enforcement of the

Policy, pending a final judgment in connection with UR Pride’s action: UR Pride Centre for
Sexuality and Gender Diversity v Saskatchewan (Minister of Education), 2023 SKKB 204.
[17]

Following the grant of this injunction, the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan passed

the Amendment Act. Section 4 of it added s. 197.4 to the Education Act. Section 197.4(1) largely
replicates the Policy. It states as follows:
(1) If a pupil who is under 16 years of age requests that the pupil’s new gender-related
preferred name or gender identity be used at school, the pupil’s teachers and other
employees of the school shall not use the new gender related preferred name or gender
identity unless consent is first obtained from the pupil’s parent or guardian.

[18]

Section 197.4(3) declares that s. 197.4 is to operate notwithstanding three of the rights

guaranteed by the Charter. It states as follows:
Responsibilities of parents and guardians
(3) Pursuant to subsection 33(1) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, this
section is declared to operate notwithstanding sections 2, 7 and 15 of the Canadian Charter
of Rights and Freedoms.

[19]

Shortly after the Amendment Act came into force, the Government revoked the Policy.

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

II.

Page 5

B.
[20]

The applications

This new legislation prompted UR Pride to apply to amend its originating application.

[21]

First, the proposed pleading acknowledges that the Policy had been withdrawn but

continues to seek a declaration that, prior to this occurring, it had limited the Charter rights of
gender diverse students. It also adds an allegation that the Policy violated the right against cruel
and unusual punishment, guaranteed by s. 12 of the Charter.
[22]

Second, the draft amended pleading includes a request for a declaration that s. 197.4 of the

Education Act limits the rights of gender diverse students under ss. 7, 12 and 15 of the Charter
and that none of these limits are reasonable and demonstrably justifiable pursuant to s. 1 of the
Charter.
[23]

Third, UR Pride sought to amend its originating application to seek a declaration under

s. 52 of the Constitution Act, 1982, that s. 197.4 of the Education Act is of no force or effect
because it unreasonably and unjustifiably violates s. 12 of the Charter, implicitly acknowledging
that the operation of s. 33 prevents it from seeking such a declaration in respect of the allegation
that s. 197.4 limits rights under ss. 7 and 15 of the Charter.
[24]

The Government opposed UR Pride’s amendment requests on several grounds. The

Government also brought two applications to have UR Pride’s action stayed or dismissed. In the
first of these applications, the Government requested an order striking UR Pride’s originating
application on the footing that the recission of the Policy had rendered any controversy over it
moot. On a contingent basis, the Government also asked for an order striking any references to the
Policy from the originating application, should it be amended.
[25]

The Government’s second application depended on the proposition that the use of s. 33

shielded the ss. 7 and 15 Charter issues from judicial scrutiny. To this end, the Government
requested an order determining four “Threshold Issues”, which it identified as follows:
i. Does the invocation of section 33 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms (the
“Charter”) in section 197.4 of The Education Act 1995 oust the jurisdiction of the Court to
review that section for compliance with sections 2, 7 and 15 of the Charter and/or to declare
that section to be of no force or effect to the extent of non-compliance?

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

Three aspects of its draft amended originating application are important in this appeal.

Page 6

iii. Further, or in the alternative, does the invocation of section 33 of the Charter in section
197.4 of The Education Act, 1995 render the relief sought by [UR Pride] with respect to
sections 7 and 15 of the Charter moot, and, if so, should the Court decline to exercise its
discretion to hear these issues notwithstanding its mootness?
iv. If any of the above issues is determined in the affirmative, does this fully dispose of
[UR Pride’s] claims with respect to sections 7 and 15 of the Charter such that they should
be dismissed or struck pursuant to Rule 7-1(3)?

[26]

Within the same application, the Government requested orders that the relief UR Pride

sought based on ss. 7 and 15 of the Charter “is moot and the Court should decline to exercise its
discretion to determine said issues” and that the allegations are “an abuse of process, doomed to
fail and/or are frivolous and vexatious”.

C.
[27]

The Chambers Decision

The judge granted UR Pride’s application to amend its originating application. He

dismissed the two motions brought by the Government.
[28]

Regarding UR Pride’s request to amend its originating application, the judge reviewed the

principles that apply to an application to amend pleadings. In this context, he rejected the
Government’s argument that the relief UR Pride sought pursuant to s. 12 of the Charter could only
be obtained in an action commenced by way of statement of claim (see paras 45–58). He concluded
that the amendments would cause no prejudice or injustice to the Government (see paras 59–72).
The judge also rejected the Government’s contentions that the allegation of a breach of s. 12 failed
to disclose a reasonable cause of action (see paras 84–103), that the amendments were scandalous,
frivolous or vexatious (see paras 104–110) and that the amendments were otherwise an abuse of
process (see paras 111–123).
[29]

The judge next addressed the Government’s application to determine the four threshold

questions referenced in paragraph 25 of these reasons. As a preliminary matter, he agreed with the
Government that he should answer the question respecting whether the valid invocation of s. 33 of
the Charter had removed s. 197.4 of the Education Act from any sort of judicial review (see
paras 124–127). He concluded that the use of s. 33 “does not serve to oust the jurisdiction of the

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

ii. Alternatively, if the Court retains such jurisdiction, should it nevertheless decline to
determine whether section 197.4 of The Education Act, 1995 complies with sections 7 and
15 of the Charter and/or to provide a declaration respecting the same?

Page 7

court to determine, and provide declaratory relief, as to whether or not the subject legislation is in
breach of … the Charter” (at para 147 and, more broadly, see paras 128–166). He also determined
that the Court retained the discretion to decline to exercise this jurisdiction and that the decision

application (see paras 167–169). He likewise declined to answer any question about mootness (see
paras 4 and 170–171).
[30]

Finally, the judge awarded UR Pride costs for the application to amend its originating

application and ordered that costs for the Government’s applications shall be in the cause.

III.

ISSUES

[31]

The parties agree that there are three issues presented in this appeal, and generally as to

how to express them. These questions, which contain several subsidiary issues, provide an
appropriate framework to decide this appeal. They will be answered in the following order:
(a)

Did the judge err in holding that the s. 33 declaration contained in s. 197.4 of the
Education Act did not oust the Court’s jurisdiction to determine whether that
provision limits the rights of gender diverse students under ss. 7 and 15(1) of the
Charter?

(b)

Did the judge err in granting leave to UR Pride to amend its originating application
to plead that s. 197.4 of the Education Act violates s. 12 of the Charter?

(c)

Did the judge err in not striking UR Pride’s originating application on mootness
grounds?

IV.

ANALYSIS
A.

The jurisdiction issue
1.

[32]

Introduction

The first issue the Government invited the judge to answer was whether the invocation of

s. 33 of the Charter in s. 197.4 of the Education Act served to “oust the jurisdiction of the Court

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

about whether to do so should await evidence and argument on the amended originating

Page 8

to review that section for compliance with sections 2, 7 and 15 of the Charter and/or to declare
that section to be of no force or effect to the extent of non-compliance”. Section 2 of the Charter
is not raised by UR Pride, so any discussion in relation to it may be put to one side. Therefore, the

declaration found in s. 197.4(3) of the Education Act did not oust the Court’s jurisdiction to
determine if, and therefore to declare that, s. 197.4 of that Act limits the rights of gender diverse
students under ss. 7 and 15(1) of the Charter.
[33]

The Government’s position is, as stated in its factum, that any judicial review of a statute

that is the subject of a s. 33 declaration “is limited to assessing whether the requirements of form
under s. 33 have been met”. Since UR Pride does not challenge the Amendment Act based on form
requirements, the Government says that the courts have no remaining role. In advancing this
position, the Government agrees that, but for the declaration contained in s. 197.4(3) of the
Education Act, the courts would have a role in determining the consistency of s. 197.4 of the
Education Act with the Charter. However, it contends that the effect of the Legislature’s s. 33
declaration is to render ss. 2, 7 and 15 of the Charter inapplicable to s. 197.4 with the result that
laws that are subject to a s. 33 declaration cannot be inconsistent with the Charter. Thus, the
Government says, the courts have no jurisdiction to assess whether the legislation limits those
rights.
[34]

For its part, UR Pride agrees that s. 33 enables s. 197.4 to operate despite ss. 7 and 15(1)

of the Charter. However, it maintains that this does not mean that the legislation does not
necessarily limit the rights of gender diverse students that are guaranteed under those Charter
provisions. Rather, according to UR Pride, s. 33 only shields s. 197.4 from the ordinary functioning
of s. 52(1) of the Constitution Act, 1982, which declares that “any law that is inconsistent with the
provisions of the Constitution is, to the extent of the inconsistency, of no force or effect”.
[35]

In view of the parties’ positions, this Court must interpret s. 33 of the Charter. As has

already been noted, the judge ultimately agreed with UR Pride’s position. Because what is at issue
is the interpretation of the Constitution, this Court applies the correctness standard in its review of
the meaning the judge ascribed to s. 33. Under this standard of review, “an appellate court must
always engage in a de novo analysis and thereby substitute its own view of the correct answer for

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

question confronting this Court is limited to whether the judge erred in holding that the s. 33

Page 9

a trial judge’s legal conclusion” (R v MacKenzie, 2013 SCC 50 at para 54, [2013] 3 SCR 250,
emphasis in original). This renders the judge’s reasons less important than his bottom-line
conclusion. The correctness standard of review demands that this Court consider the matter afresh.

[36]

One of the Government’s principal arguments is that the Supreme Court of Canada has

already decided the issue before the Court. After addressing that submission, these reasons will
review and apply the principles of constitutional interpretation to answer the overarching issue of
whether s. 33 removes the courts’ jurisdiction in a case like this one.
2.
[37]

Key constitutional provisions

This appeal requires a careful examination of s. 33 of the Charter and s. 52 of the

Constitution Act, 1982. Section 33 of the Charter appears, with s. 32, under the heading
“Application of Charter”. These two provisions state as follows:
Application of Charter

Application de la charte

32 (1) This Charter applies

32 (1) La présente charte s’applique :

(a) to the Parliament and government of
Canada in respect of all matters within the
authority of Parliament including all matters
relating to the Yukon Territory and
Northwest Territories; and

a) au Parlement et au gouvernement du
Canada, pour tous les domaines relevant du
Parlement, y compris ceux qui concernent le
territoire du Yukon et les territoires du NordOuest;

(b) to the legislature and government of each
province in respect of all matters within the
authority of the legislature of each province.

b) à la législature et au gouvernement de
chaque province, pour tous les domaines
relevant de cette législature.

Exception

Restriction

(2) Notwithstanding subsection (1), section 15
shall not have effect until three years after this
section comes into force.

(2) Par dérogation au paragraphe (1), l’article 15
n’a d’effet que trois ans après l’entrée en
vigueur du présent article.

Exception where express declaration

Dérogation par déclaration expresse

33 (1) Parliament or the legislature of a province
may expressly declare in an Act of Parliament
or of the legislature, as the case may be, that the
Act or a provision thereof shall operate
notwithstanding a provision included in section
2 or sections 7 to 15 of this Charter.

33 (1) Le Parlement ou la législature d’une
province peut adopter une loi où il est
expressément déclaré que celle-ci ou une de ses
dispositions a effet indépendamment d’une
disposition donnée de l’article 2 ou des articles
7 à 15 de la présente charte.

Operation of exception

Effet de la dérogation

(2) An Act or a provision of an Act in respect of
which a declaration made under this section is in

(2) La loi ou la disposition qui fait l’objet d’une
déclaration conforme au présent article et en

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

In doing so, these reasons address the arguments that were put to the Court in this appeal.

effect shall have such operation as it would have
but for the provision of this Charter referred to
in the declaration.

vigueur a l’effet qu’elle aurait sauf la disposition
en cause de la charte.

Five year limitation

Durée de validité

(3) A declaration made under subsection (1)
shall cease to have effect five years after it
comes into force or on such earlier date as may
be specified in the declaration.

(3) La déclaration visée au paragraphe (1) cesse
d’avoir effet à la date qui y est précisée ou, au
plus tard, cinq ans après son entrée en vigueur.

Re-enactment

Nouvelle adoption

(4) Parliament or the legislature of a province
may re-enact a declaration made under
subsection (1).

(4) Le Parlement ou une législature peut adopter
de nouveau une déclaration visée au paragraphe
(1).

Five year limitation

Durée de validité

(5) Subsection (3) applies in respect of a reenactment made under subsection (4).

(5) Le paragraphe (3) s’applique à toute
déclaration adoptée sous le régime du
paragraphe (4).

[38]

Section 52 of the Constitution Act, 1982, of which the Charter is part, states as follows:

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

Page 10

Primacy of Constitution of Canada

Primauté de la Constitution du Canada

52 (1) The Constitution of Canada is the
supreme law of Canada, and any law that is
inconsistent with the provisions of the
Constitution is, to the extent of the
inconsistency, of no force or effect.

52 (1) La Constitution du Canada est la loi
suprême du Canada; elle rend inopérantes les
dispositions incompatibles de toute autre règle
de droit.

Constitution of Canada

Constitution du Canada

(2) The Constitution of Canada includes

(2) La Constitution du Canada comprend :

(a) the Canada Act 1982, including this Act;
(b) the Acts and orders referred to in the
schedule; and
(c) any amendment to any Act or order
referred to in paragraph (a) or (b).

a) la Loi de 1982 sur le Canada, y compris la
présente loi;
b) les textes législatifs et les décrets figurant
à l’annexe;
c) les modifications des textes législatifs et
des décrets mentionnés aux alinéas a) ou b).

Amendments to Constitution of Canada

Modification

(3) Amendments to the Constitution of Canada
shall be made only in accordance with the
authority contained in the Constitution of
Canada.

(3) La Constitution du Canada ne peut être
modifiée que conformément aux pouvoirs
conférés par elle.

3.
[39]

The Supreme Court has not decided the issue

The Government argues that the Supreme Court of Canada has already determined that any

judicial review of a statute which is the subject of a s. 33 declaration is restricted to assessing
whether the requirements of form under s. 33 have been met. In offering this submission, it
concedes in its factum that “the Supreme Court of Canada has not been tasked with deciding this
point directly”. Nonetheless, it asserts that “there are numerous references in Supreme Court of
Canada Charter jurisprudence that clearly and consistently endorse this interpretation”. In
advancing this position, the Government principally emphasises Ford v Québec (Attorney
General), [1988] 2 SCR 712 [Ford], and Devine v Québec (Attorney General), [1988] 2 SCR 790
[Devine], which was released contemporaneously with Ford. It also refers to R v Hess; R v Nguyen,
[1990] 2 SCR 906 at 926 [Hess; Nguyen]; Comité paritaire de l’industrie de la chemise v Potash;
Comité paritaire de l’industrie de la chemise v Sélection Milton, [1994] 2 SCR 406 at 435–436
[Potash]; Vriend v Alberta, [1998] 1 SCR 493 [Vriend]; Thomson Newspapers Co. v Canada
(Attorney General), [1998] 1 SCR 877 at para 79 [Thomson Newspapers]; Gosselin v Québec
(Attorney General), 2002 SCC 84 at para 15, [2002] 4 SCR 429 [Gosselin]; and Law Society of

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

Page 11

Page 12

British Columbia v Trinity Western University, 2018 SCC 32 at para 199, [2018] 2 SCR 293
[Trinity Western].
If the Supreme Court has decided the question, this Court would be required to carefully

evaluate whether it is open to us to revisit the issue within the principles established in Canada
(Attorney General) v Bedford, 2013 SCC 72, [2013] 3 SCR 1101, or whether as a matter of stare
decisis, we are bound to simply follow that Court’s decision. However, the ensuing analysis
demonstrates that the Supreme Court has not yet determined the issue of the courts’ jurisdiction in
a case like this one.
a.
[41]

Ford and Devine

Ford involved a challenge to parts of Québec legislation that prohibited the use of

commercial signs written in languages other than French and required businesses to use only the
French versions of their names, said to amount to a violation of freedom of expression, as
guaranteed by s. 2(b) of the Charter. Devine arose in the same context and adopted the ruling in
Ford. In response to the process surrounding the patriation of the Constitution in 1982, the National
Assembly of Québec invoked s. 33 in two separate enactments. The Act respecting the Constitution
Act, 1982, SQ 1982, c 21, was an omnibus bill, introducing s. 214 into the Charter of the French
Language, that subjected all Québec laws to the Charter’s notwithstanding clause. Later, the
National Assembly of Québec again invoked s. 33 of the Charter in s. 52 of the Charter of the
French Language (An Act to amend the Charter of the French Language, SQ 1983, c 56, s 52).
Section 214 applied to the entirety of the Charter of the French Language, whereas s. 52 only
applied to s. 58, which was also amended at the time.
[42]

The first question in the two cases was whether the s. 33 declaration enacted in the Charter

of the French Language was valid (Ford at 732 and Devine at 812). The Court’s focus was on the
manner and form of the invocation of a s. 33 override, as identified in the following passage (Ford
at 734):
The issue of validity … is whether a declaration in this form is one that is made in
conformity with the override authority conferred by s. 33 of the Canadian Charter of Right
and Freedoms. There are additional issues of validity applicable to s. 214 of the Charter of
the French Language arising from the manner of its enactment, that is, the “omnibus”
character of the Act which enacted it, and from the retrospective effect given to s. 214.

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

[40]

Page 13

[43]

Earlier, in Reference re Manitoba Language Rights, [1985] 1 SCR 721 at 746 [Manitoba

Language Reference], the Supreme Court had confirmed that “where constitutional manner and
form requirements have not been complied with, the consequence of such non-compliance

validly invoked.
[44]

The following extract from Ford explains the requirements for activating s. 33 and contains

the passage that the Government presently identifies as the Supreme Court’s determination of the
jurisdiction question at issue in this appeal (at 740–741):
In the course of argument different views were expressed as to the constitutional
perspective from which the meaning and application of s. 33 of the Canadian Charter of
Rights and Freedoms should be approached: the one suggesting that it reflects the
continuing importance of legislative supremacy, the other suggesting the seriousness of a
legislative decision to override guaranteed rights and freedoms and the importance that
such a decision be taken only as a result of a fully informed democratic process. These two
perspectives are not, however, particularly relevant or helpful in construing the
requirements of s. 33. Section 33 lays down requirements of form only, and there is no
warrant for importing into it grounds for substantive review of the legislative policy in
exercising the override authority in a particular case. The requirement of an apparent link
or relationship between the overriding Act and the guaranteed rights or freedoms to be
overridden seems to be a substantive ground of review. It appears to require that the
legislature identify the provisions of the Act in question which might otherwise infringe
specified guaranteed rights or freedoms. That would seem to require a prima facie
justification of the decision to exercise the override authority rather than merely a certain
formal expression of it. There is, however, no warrant in the terms of s. 33 for such a
requirement. A legislature may not be in a position to judge with any degree of certainty
what provisions of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms might be successfully
invoked against various aspects of the Act in question. For this reason it must be permitted
in a particular case to override more than one provision of the Charter and indeed all of
the provisions which it is permitted to override by the terms of s. 33. The standard override
provision in issue in this appeal is, therefore, a valid exercise of the authority conferred by
s. 33 in so far as it purports to override all of the provisions in s. 2 and ss. 7 to 15 of the
Charter. The essential requirement of form laid down by s. 33 is that the override
declaration must be an express declaration that an Act or a provision of an Act shall operate
notwithstanding a provision included in s. 2 or ss. 7 to 15 of the Charter.
(Emphasis added)

[45]

The Government argues that the emphasised passage amounts to a decision by the Supreme

Court that a court cannot review legislation for Charter consistency once it has been determined
that s. 33 was validly invoked. This submission ignores the context in which the Supreme Court’s
comments were offered and, in particular, the issue it was called to decide.

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

continues to be invalidity”. Ford and Devine laid out the requirements of form for s. 33 to be

Page 14

[46]

To reiterate, the task confronting the Court in Ford was to determine the requirements for

validly invoking s. 33. At the beginning of the paragraph in question, the Court acknowledged
differing interpretations of the notwithstanding clause but concluded they were irrelevant to

to form only, and not of substantive review, were thus directed to assessing the decision made by
the National Assembly of Québec to invoke s. 33. The effect of the s. 33 declaration, if validly
made, was not in dispute before the Court. I agree in this regard with the view that, in “[r]ejecting
the utility of a deeper analysis into the provision’s purpose, or its relationship with other
constitutional features, including the doctrine of parliamentary sovereignty, the Court simply
turned to its interpretation of the textual demands outlined in section 33(1) and found that Quebec
had complied with them” (Eric M. Adams, “Ford Focus: Constitutional Context and the
Notwithstanding Clause” (2023) 32:3 Const Forum Const 33 at 40, 2024 CanLIIDocs 494 [Eric
M. Adams, “Ford Focus”]; see also Stéphane Beaulac, “Clause de dérogation et stare decisis
horizontal, ou comment revoir et compléter l’arrêt Ford à la Cour suprême du Canada” (2024) 75
UNBLJ 184 at 185–186).
[47]

Ford does not foreclose judicial review for Charter consistency when confronted with a

s. 33 declaration. Rather, insofar as is relevant to this appeal, the ratio of Ford is that Parliament
or a provincial legislature does not need to offer a substantive justification for the decision to
invoke s. 33 for the declaration to be valid, for instance that the Charter rights included in the
declaration “could reasonably be contemplated as being put in issue by the legislation in question”
(Ford at 739). Put differently, “judicial review has no role to play in adding extraneous substantive
preconditions to the legislative decision to invoke the clause beyond the requirements set out in
the provision itself” (Eric M. Adams, “Ford Focus” at 34, emphasis in original).
[48]

In summary, Ford and Devine stand for the proposition that “[s]ection 33 lays down

requirements of form only, and there is no warrant for importing into it grounds for substantive
review of the legislative policy in exercising the override authority in a particular case” (Ford at
740). Those decisions do not support the Government’s assertion that the issue of the courts’
jurisdiction to review legislation invoking s. 33 has previously been decided.

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

construing the requirements of s. 33. The Supreme Court’s comments on the requirements, going

Page 15

b.
[49]

Hess; Nguyen

In Hess; Nguyen, two individuals were convicted of sexual intercourse with a female under

the age of 14 pursuant to s. 146(1) of the Criminal Code. The Supreme Court was called upon to

of age, infringed ss. 7 or 15 of the Charter and whether any such infringement could be justified
under s. 1. The majority found a s. 7 infringement that was not saved by s. 1 of the Charter. While
there had been no s. 33 declaration in that case, the Government relies on the following passage
from the dissenting judgment of Wilson J., which was made in the context of her discussion of s. 1
of the Charter (at 926):
Finally, it seems to me important to address McLachlin J.’s observation that “to hold that
s. 1 can never as a matter of law be applicable to Charter rights falling within certain
categories is to rewrite the Charter” (p. 953). I agree that one cannot say that s. 1 is not
relevant or “applicable” to the rights and freedoms that the Charter protects. Indeed,
whenever legislation that is not insulated from judicial review by s. 33 of the Charter
infringes Charter rights or freedoms, the government is fully entitled to try to justify the
legislation under s. 1 of the Charter.
(Emphasis added)

[50]

Self-evidently, the issue before the Court did not involve s. 33 of the Charter.

Justice Wilson’s point is easily understood without any reference to s. 33, namely that whenever
legislation infringes Charter rights or freedoms, the government is fully entitled to try to justify
the legislation under s. 1 of the Charter.
c.
[51]

Potash

In Potash, the Supreme Court considered whether a statutory provision granting certain

search powers to inspectors violated s. 8 of the Charter. Section 33 had been invoked in relation
to a subparagraph of one of the provisions. The decision is complex, with two sets of reasons on
behalf of the nine judges who participated in the disposition of the appeal. The reasons of
La Forest J. attracted the concurrence of five other judges. Justice L’Heureux-Dubé also delivered
reasons. These were concurred in by four other judges, including two who had joined in
La Forest J.’s reasons. In her judgment, L’Heureux-Dubé J. stated as follows (at 435–436):
Additionally, at the time the offences were committed the fourth paragraph of s. 22(e)
ACAD [Act respecting Collective Agreement Decrees, RSQ, c D-2] was the subject of an
exception to s. 8 of the Charter, adopted in accordance with its s. 33. This fourth paragraph
was inserted in the ACAD by the Act to amend Various Legislation respecting Labour
Relations, S.Q. 1984, c. 45, s. 35 of which expressly provided for an exception to ss. 2 and

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

decide whether that provision, which expressly removed the defence of honest but mistaken belief

Page 16

(Emphasis added)

[52]

The Government submits that the emphasized words imply that the effect of a s. 33

declaration is to immunize legislation from judicial review for Charter consistency. Respectfully,
the passage is too oblique to draw such a significant conclusion. For example, nothing in this
passage states that the Court cannot review the legislation for Charter consistency, as one might
expect if the question were at issue. To the contrary, the statement is permissive, holding only that
“the Court does not have to consider [the possible s. 8 Charter breach] in view of [the valid s. 33
declaration]” (emphasis added). In any event, the fourth paragraph of s. 22(e) of the Act respecting
Collective Agreement Decrees, RSQ, c D-2, was not at issue on appeal, which may explain why
the judgment of La Forest J. did not address it.
d.
[53]

Vriend

The issue in Vriend was whether the exclusion of sexual orientation as a prohibited ground

of discrimination in several pieces of Alberta’s human rights legislation violated s. 15(1) of the
Charter and could not be saved by s. 1. The Supreme Court concluded that s. 15(1) had been
breached and remedied such by reading language into the legislation in question. The Government
relies on the majority judgment of Iacobucci J., in which he characterized s. 33 as “establish[ing]
that the final word in our constitutional structure is in fact left to the legislature and not the courts”
(at para 137).
[54]

Two observations must be made in relation to this remark. First, Vriend did not involve an

application of s. 33, let alone the jurisdictional issue now before this Court. Second, in context, the
words the Government relies on from Vriend merely indicate that s. 33 demonstrates how the
remedy of reading in a prohibited ground does not limit the legislative process or democratic
decision-making. I will return to discuss Vriend later in these reasons when I canvass more fully
the roles of the legislatures and the courts.

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

7 to 15 of the Charter. There is no doubt as to the validity of such an exception, since it
has been recognized by this Court (Ford v. Quebec (Attorney General), [1988] 2 S.C.R.
712, at pp. 741-42 (per curiam)). Accordingly, although the respondents argued that the
fourth paragraph of s. 22(e) is in breach of s. 8 of the Charter, the Court does not have to
consider this point in view of the constitutionally valid exception. However, the validity of
this fourth paragraph in light of s. 24.1 of the Quebec Charter will have to be considered.

Page 17

e.
[55]

Gosselin, Thomson Newspapers and Trinity Western

In Gosselin, the Supreme Court mentioned that An Act respecting the Constitution Act,

1982, RSQ, c L-4.2, the same omnibus law invoking s. 33 that was discussed in Ford, “withdrew
the law was “immune from Canadian Charter scrutiny”. Again, the intent of these words appears
only from their context. The full paragraph of which they are a part states the following:
[15]
A preliminary issue arises in connection with s. 33 of the Canadian Charter — the
“notwithstanding clause”. By virtue of An Act respecting the Constitution Act, 1982,
R.S.Q., c. L-4.2, the Quebec legislature withdrew all Quebec laws from the Canadian
Charter regime for five years from their inception. This means that the Act is immune from
Canadian Charter scrutiny from June 23, 1982 to June 23, 1987, and the programs part of
the scheme is immune from April 4, 1984 to April 4, 1989 (see An Act to amend the Social
Aid Act, S.Q. 1984, c. 5, ss. 4 and 5). It could be argued, therefore, that the scheme is
protected from Canadian Charter scrutiny on s. 7 or s. 15(1) grounds for the whole period
except for the four months from April 4, 1989 to August 1, 1989. This raises the further
question of whether evidence on the legislation’s impact outside the four-month period
subject to Canadian Charter scrutiny can be used to generate conclusions about
compliance with the Canadian Charter within the four-month period. In view of my
conclusion that the program is constitutional in any event, I need not resolve these issues.
(Emphasis in original)

[56]

In context, the reference to the Act being “immune from Canadian Charter scrutiny” is

easily understood to mean that it is shielded from the ordinary operation of s. 52(1) of the
Constitution Act, 1982. Notably, the Court left for another day the question of whether evidence
of the Act’s impact during the period that was shielded by the s. 33 declaration “could be used to
generate conclusions about compliance with the Canadian Charter” after the s. 33 declaration had
expired.
[57]

Equally distinguishable are the observations made in Thomson Newspapers (contrasting

s. 3 with other enumerated rights and freedoms because a violation of s. 3 “cannot be insulated
from Charter review by Parliament or a provincial legislature” (at para 79)), and Trinity Western
(the invocation of s. 33 “exempts the infringement from constitutional scrutiny” (at para 199)). In
both cases, the comments were offered after there had already been a judicial determination that
the legislation was inconsistent with a Charter right. In neither case was the effect of a s. 33
declaration before the Court. The remarks in both are, therefore, easily understood as merely
expressing that a law protected by the notwithstanding clause cannot be subject to a declaration
made under s. 52 of the Constitution Act, 1982.

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

all Québec laws from the Canadian Charter regime for five years from their inception” and that

Page 18

f.
[58]

Conclusion on Supreme Court jurisprudence

None of these Supreme Court of Canada cases turned on the question of the effect of a valid

declaration made pursuant to s. 33, nor was the Supreme Court called to decide that issue. Given

pronouncing on important constitutional issues, those decisions should not be taken to have
decided the issue now before this Court. Finally, as these reasons will demonstrate, points made
in several of these cases stand in opposition to the position advanced by the Government in this
appeal.
[59]

Because the Supreme Court has not determined the issue, the question this Court must

decide is whether s. 33 does more than simply to allow the legislation to operate – that is, to be
shielded from the invalidating effect which would result from a declaration of inconsistency under
s. 52 of the Constitution Act, 1982 – even if it conflicts with a Charter right. Specifically, the issue
is as follows: Did the judge err when he held that the s. 33 declaration contained in s. 197.4 of the
Education Act did not oust the Court’s jurisdiction to determine if that provision limits the rights
of gender diverse students under ss. 7 and 15(1) of the Charter? The analysis of this issue begins
by first reviewing the principles that must be applied to assign meaning to s. 33.
4.

Principles of interpretation
a.

[60]

Purposive textual approach

Courts are to take a purposive approach to Charter interpretation. The early jurisprudence

was summarized by Dickson J. (as he then was) in R v Big M Drug Mart Ltd., [1985] 1 SCR 295
at 344 [Big M Drug Mart]:
This Court has already, in some measure, set out the basic approach to be taken in
interpreting the Charter. In Hunter v. Southam Inc., [1984] 2 S.C.R. 145, this Court
expressed the view that the proper approach to the definition of the rights and freedoms
guaranteed by the Charter was a purposive one. The meaning of a right or freedom
guaranteed by the Charter was to be ascertained by an analysis of the purpose of such a
guarantee; it was to be understood, in other words, in the light of the interests it was meant
to protect.
In my view this analysis is to be undertaken, and the purpose of the right or freedom in
question is to be sought by reference to the character and the larger objects of the Charter
itself, to the language chosen to articulate the specific right or freedom, to the historical
origins of the concepts enshrined, and where applicable, to the meaning and purpose of the
other specific rights and freedoms with which it is associated within the text of the Charter.
The interpretation should be, as the judgment in Southam emphasizes, a generous rather

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

these realities and the steadfast history of care that has been demonstrated by that Court in

Page 19

(Emphasis in original)

[61]

Other decisions have emphasized that Charter provisions must be “interpreted in a broad

and purposive manner and placed in their proper linguistic, philosophic, and historical contexts”
(Reference re Senate Reform, 2014 SCC 32 at para 25, [2014] 1 SCR 704 [Senate Reference]).
More recent jurisprudence has clarified that “within the purposive approach, the analysis must
begin by considering the text of the provision” (Québec (Attorney General) v 9147-0732 Québec
inc., 2020 SCC 32 at para 8, [2020] 3 SCR 426 [Québec inc.], emphasis in original). This has led
the Supreme Court to use the phrase “purposive textual interpretation” to describe the proper
approach (Toronto (City) v Ontario (Attorney General), 2021 SCC 34 at para 53, [2021] 2 SCR
845 [Toronto (City)]). Even more recently, in Canada (Attorney General) v Power, 2024 SCC 26
at para 25, 494 DLR (4th) 191 [Power], Wagner C.J.C. and Karakatsanis J. summarized the
“proper approach to Charter interpretation”, as follows:
[26]
The Charter must be given a generous and expansive interpretation; not a narrow,
technical or legalistic one (Hunter v. Southam Inc., [1984] 2 S.C.R. 145, at p. 156). Charter
provisions must be “interpreted in a broad and purposive manner and placed in their proper
linguistic, philosophic, and historical contexts” (Reference re Senate Reform, 2014 SCC
32, [2014] 1 S.C.R. 704, at para. 25).
[27]
A purposive approach considers constitutional principles. Indeed, “the
Constitution must be interpreted with a view to discerning the structure of government that
it seeks to implement. The assumptions that underlie the text and the manner in which the
constitutional provisions are intended to interact with one another must inform our
interpretation, understanding, and application of the text” (Reference re Senate Reform, at
para. 26).

[62]

Although these authorities dealt with the proper interpretation of the Charter, of which

s. 33 is a part, the approach they set out applies broadly to the interpretation of the Constitution as
a whole, including s. 52. Thus, in Reference re Public Service Employee Relations Act (Alberta),
[1987] 1 SCR 313 at 394 [Reference Re PSERA], the Supreme Court did not distinguish the
principles that apply to the proper interpretation of the Charter and other parts of the Constitution,
stating as follows: “The interpretation of the Charter, as of all constitutional documents, is
constrained by the language, structure, and history of the constitutional text, by constitutional

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

than a legalistic one, aimed at fulfilling the purpose of the guarantee and securing for
individuals the full benefit of the Charter’s protection. At the same time it is important not
to overshoot the actual purpose of the right or freedom in question, but to recall that the
Charter was not enacted in a vacuum, and must therefore, as this Court’s decision in Law
Society of Upper Canada v. Skapinker, [1984] 1 S.C.R. 357, illustrates, be placed in its
proper linguistic, philosophic and historical contexts.

Page 20

tradition, and by the history, traditions, and underlying philosophies of our society” (emphasis
added, at 394).
The uniformity of principles for constitutional interpretation generally was reiterated in

Senate Reference (at paras 25–26), cited above in Power. More recently, in Québec inc., the
Supreme Court interchanged constitutional interpretation and Charter interpretation when
discussing the imperative of beginning with the text (see paras 8–11). Thus, the purposive textual
approach applies equally to the Charter and to the other parts of the Constitution that these reasons
will discuss.
b.
[64]

Use of headings and marginal notes

In the context of an explanation of the purposive textual approach to constitutional

interpretation, it is necessary to refer to the proper use of headings and marginal notes.
[65]

In Law Society of Upper Canada v Skapinker, [1984] 1 SCR 357 [Skapinker], the Supreme

Court observed that headings were deliberately included in the Charter and formed part of the
resolution that Parliament debated, though marginal notes were not. Thus, the Court held that the
Charter’s headings are properly considered when interpreting that constitutional document (at
376–377):
It is clear that these headings were systematically and deliberately included as an integral
part of the Charter for whatever purpose. At the very minimum, the Court must take them
into consideration when engaged in the process of discerning the meaning and application
of the provisions of the Charter. The extent of the influence of a heading in this process
will depend upon many factors including (but the list is not intended to be all-embracing)
the degree of difficulty by reason of ambiguity or obscurity in construing the section; the
length and complexity of the provision; the apparent homogeneity of the provision
appearing under the heading; the use of generic terminology in the heading; the presence
or absence of a system of headings which appear to segregate the component elements of
the Charter; and the relationship of the terminology employed in the heading to the
substance of the headlined provision. …
…
… I conclude that an attempt must be made to bring about a reconciliation of the heading
with the section introduced by it. If, however, it becomes apparent that the section when
read as a whole is clear and without ambiguity, the heading will not operate to change that
clear and unambiguous meaning. Even in that midway position, a court should not, by the
adoption of a technical rule of construction, shut itself off from whatever small assistance
might be gathered from an examination of the heading as part of the entire constitutional
document.

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

[63]

Page 21

[66]

Similarly, although assigned even less weight, the Supreme Court has invited courts to

consider marginal notes when interpreting the Constitution. In this regard, in R v Wigglesworth,
[1987] 2 SCR 541, after quoting the foregoing passage from Skapinker, Wilson J. instructed as

It must be acknowledged, however, that marginal notes, unlike statutory headings, are not
an integral part of the Charter: see Canadian Pacific Ltd. v. Attorney General of Canada,
[1986] 1 S.C.R. 678, at p. 682. The case for their utilization as aids to statutory
interpretation is accordingly weaker. I believe, however, that the distinction can be
adequately recognized by the degree of weight attached to them. I find some support in the
marginal note therefore for the proposition that the opening words of s. 11 “charged with
an offence” restrict the application of the section to criminal or quasi-criminal proceedings
and proceedings giving rise to penal consequences.

c.
[67]

Attention to both English and French versions

The principles of bilingual constitutional interpretation require special attention to both the

English and French versions of the Constitution Act, 1982, as they are equally authoritative
pursuant to s. 57:
English and French versions of this Act

Versions française et anglaise de la présente
loi

57 The English and French versions of this Act
are equally authoritative.

57 Les versions française et anglaise de la
présente loi ont également force de loi.

[68]

From its very first decision interpreting the Charter, the Supreme Court has been attentive

to differences between the English and French text (Skapinker at 378). Thus, it has adopted the
approach of accounting for each version of the text of a constitutional provision, ensuring the equal
authority and independence of both versions: Michael Beaupré, Interpreting Bilingual Legislation,
2d ed (Toronto: Carswell, 1986) at 201). In that sense, courts will attempt “to make ambiguous
words coincide as much as possible with the scheme and objects of the Constitution Acts and with
the overall system of the law” (Beaupré at 202).
[69]

In a non-constitutional context, the Supreme Court has developed principles to deal with

situations where the two versions are not completely consistent with each other. The Court in R v
S.A.C., 2008 SCC 47, [2008] 2 SCR 675, referred to the two-step approach laid out earlier in
Schreiber v Canada (Attorney General), 2002 SCC 62, [2002] 3 SCR 269, and R v Daoust, 2004
SCC 6, [2004] 1 SCR 217, saying:

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

follows (at 558):

[15]
The first step is to determine whether there is discordance between the English and
French versions of the provision and, if so, whether a shared meaning can be found. Where
a provision may have different meanings, the court has to determine what kind of
discrepancy is involved. There are three possibilities. First, the English and French versions
may be irreconcilable. In such cases, it will be impossible to find a shared meaning and the
ordinary rules of interpretation will accordingly apply: Daoust, at para. 27; P.-A. Côté, The
Interpretation of Legislation in Canada (3rd ed. 2000), at p. 327. Second, one version may
be ambiguous while the other is plain and unequivocal. The shared meaning will then be
that of the version that is plain and unambiguous: Daoust, at para. 28; Côté, at p. 327.
Third, one version may have a broader meaning than the other. According to LeBel J. in
Schreiber, at para. 56, “where one of the two versions is broader than the other, the
common meaning would favour the more restricted or limited meaning”.
[16]
At the second step, it must be determined whether the shared meaning is consistent
with Parliament’s intent: Daoust, at para. 30.

[70]

These principles of bilingual interpretation are consistent with the purposive textual

approach to interpreting the Constitution, according to which the analysis begins with the text of
a provision. Indeed, although decided prior to the aforementioned cases, in Mahe v Alberta, [1990]
1 SCR 342 at 369–370 [Mahe], the Supreme Court analyzed the text and the specific words in the
context of the entire section, in light of the purpose of the provision and common sense. The Court
also pointed out the ambiguity of one version of the text, whereas it deemed the other version to
be clearer. On this point, the Court observed that “[i]t has been stated on several occasions by [the
Supreme Court of Canada], that where there is an ambiguity in one version of the Charter, and the
other version is less ambiguous, then the meaning of the less ambiguous version should be
adopted” (at 370).
[71]

With these principles in mind, the issue of whether s. 33 ousts the courts’ jurisdiction in a

case like this one remains to be decided.
5.
[72]

Section 33 does not modify the content of Charter guarantees

To begin, one largely uncontested point is this: a s. 33 declaration does not modify the

content of the rights and freedoms that are referred to in the declaration, or what constitutes a
reasonable limit to them under s. 1 of the Charter.
[73]

This point is largely uncontested because, while the Government does not directly say that

s. 33 has this effect, several of the secondary sources that it relies upon contain iterations of the
idea that s. 33 should be approached on the basis that a declaration made under it effectively
substitutes the legislature’s interpretation of a Charter right — and what constitutes a reasonable

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

Page 22

Page 23

limit to it — for any possible meaning that a court might ascribe. Variations of this thought are
raised directly, or by implication, in the writings of Geoffrey Sigalet, “Notwithstanding Judicial
Review: Legal and Political Reasons Why Courts Cannot Review Laws Invoking Section 33” in

Controversies (Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 2024) 168 at 175–176 [Geoffrey
Sigalet, “Notwithstanding Judicial Review”]; Dwight Newman, “Canada’s Notwithstanding
Clause, Dialogue, and Constitutional Identities”, in Geoffrey Sigalet, Gregoire Webber & Rosalind
Dixon, eds, Constitutional Dialogue: Rights, Democracy, Institutions (Cambridge, UK:
Cambridge University Press, 2019) 209 at 226–227, 232 [Dwight Newman on Canada’s
Notwithstanding Clause]; Maxime St-Hilaire and Xavier Foccroulle Ménard, “Nothing to Declare:
A Response to Grégoire Webber, Eric Mendelsohn, Robert Leckey, and Léonid Sirota on the
Effects of the Notwithstanding Clause” (2020) 29:1 Const Forum Const 38 at 40; and
Christopher Manfredi, “Courts, Legislatures, and the Politics of Judicial Decision-Making (or
Perhaps the Notwithstanding Clause Isn’t Such a Bad Thing After All)” in Peter L. Biro, ed, The
Notwithstanding Clause and the Canadian Charter: Rights, Reforms, and Controversies
(Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 2024) 184 at 191–194.
[74]

The courts’ mandate for reviewing legislation that is subject to a declaration made pursuant

to s. 33 turns on the issue of whether a declaration effectively modifies the content of the specified
rights and freedoms. As these reasons demonstrate, s. 33 does not have that effect; it does not
modify the content of the rights that are referred to in a declaration made under that section. Indeed,
the stability of the content of Charter rights and freedoms – that is, the meaning to be assigned to
those rights and freedoms and what constitutes a reasonable limit to them under s. 1 – grounds the
conclusion that the courts retain a role in determining whether legislation limits such rights despite
the invocation of s. 33.
[75]

The explanation for why s. 33 cannot be understood to modify the content of the rights that

are referred to in a declaration made under that section begins with an examination of the
constitutional text. Section 33(1) empowers Parliament or a provincial legislature to expressly
declare in an Act “that the Act or a provision thereof shall operate notwithstanding a provision
included in section 2 or sections 7 to 15 of [the] Charter” (emphasis added). In French, the text is
that Parliament or a provincial legislature may adopt a law wherein it is expressly declared “que

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

Peter L. Biro, ed, The Notwithstanding Clause and the Canadian Charter: Rights, Reforms, and

Page 24

celle-ci ou une de ses dispositions a effet indépendamment d’une disposition donnée de l’article 2
ou des articles 7 à 15 de la présente charte” (emphasis added).
In a similar vein, s. 33(2) describes the effect of a declaration made under s. 33(1), by

stating that “[a]n Act or a provision of an Act in respect of which a declaration made under this
section is in effect shall have such operation as it would have but for the provision of this Charter
referred to in the declaration” (emphasis added) and, in French, “[l]a loi ou la disposition qui fait
l’objet d’une declaration conforme au present article et en vigueur a l’effet qu’elle aurait sauf la
disposition en cause de la charte” (emphasis added).
[77]

Two points emerge from the emphasized words in ss. 33(1) and 33(2).

[78]

The first point is that on the face of both s. 33(1) and s. 33(2), the object of the declaration

is the Act of Parliament or the legislature, as the case may be. Thus, in both the English and French
versions of the constitutional text, the effect of a declaration made under s. 33 is on the Act of
Parliament or the legislature containing that declaration. In other words, the s. 33 declaration does
not serve to modify the Charter right or freedom.
[79]

The second point is that at least one effect of the s. 33 declaration is to allow for the

continued operation of the statute, notwithstanding, or in spite of, the Charter right or freedom that
is the subject of that declaration. Section 33(1) states that the Act shall operate notwithstanding (a
effet indépendamment) the right or freedom. Section 33(2) directs that the Act shall have such
operation (a l’effet) as it would have had but for the Charter right or freedom. Thus, both the
English and French texts lead to the conclusion that, when a declaration is made that a law may
operate notwithstanding a Charter right or freedom, it serves to overcome the effect of s. 52 of the
Constitution Act, 1982. That provision, reproduced in its entirety earlier in these reasons, states
that any law inconsistent with the provisions of the Constitution “is, to the extent of the
inconsistency, of no force or effect” (emphasis added), and in French, “[la Constitution] rend
inopérantes les dispositions incompatibles de toute autre règle de droit” (emphasis added).
[80]

I agree, in this regard, with the Québec Court of Appeal in Organisation mondiale sikhe

du Canada c Procureur général du Québec, 2024 QCCA 254, leave to appeal and cross-appeal to
SCC granted 2025 CanLII 2818 [Hak CA], when it stated as follows:

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

[76]

Page 25

[328] … the use of s. 33 of the Canadian Charter has the effect of protecting the statute
in question from the application of any of ss. 2 and 7 to 15 of the Canadian Charter, such
that it operates without regard to these provisions, sheltered from the effects that would
otherwise result from s. 52(1) of the [Constitution Act,] 1982.

[81]

By virtue of s. 33(3), a declaration under s. 33(1) can be effective for no more than

five years, subject to renewal. As the Government correctly emphasized in its factum, the five-year
limitation on any s. 33 declaration ensures that elected representatives who pass such a declaration
are accountable to the citizens who elect them. During the period covered by the declaration, the
legislation continues to operate – thus, it continues to be in force or effect – even if it is at odds
with a selected Charter right or freedom. However, the s. 33 declaration is no longer effective once
it expires, unless reenacted.
[82]

This functioning of s. 33 is shown in Ford. As has been mentioned, the National Assembly

of Québec had invoked s. 33 of the Charter in two different enactments. At this juncture, the simple
but important point to draw from Ford is that, by the time the decision was rendered, more than
five years had passed since s. 214 of the Charter of the French Language had come into force. The
Supreme Court concluded that this meant that s. 214 had “ceased to have effect by operation of
s. 33(3) of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms five years after it came into force” and
noted that “it was not re-enacted pursuant to s. 33(4) of the Charter” (at 734). In contrast, the Court
observed that s. 52 of the Charter of the French Language would “not cease to have effect by
operation of s. 33(3) of the [Charter] until February 1, 1989” (at 735).
[83]

None of this leads to the conclusion that s. 33 changes the content of the Charter rights

mentioned in a declaration under that section. Rather, the contrary is true.
[84]

An illustration of this proposition is found in the example of what occurs when s. 33 is

invoked after a court has made a finding that the legislation at issue violates a Charter right. If,
after that ruling, Parliament or a legislature declares under s. 33 that the legislation is to operate
notwithstanding the Charter guarantee, then it may do so for a period up to five years. In this
scenario, the functioning of the legislation continues and the meaning or content of the Charterguaranteed right or freedom does not change. What is different is that during the period covered

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

(Emphasis added)

Page 26

by the s. 33 declaration, the legislation is allowed to operate notwithstanding that it conflicts with
the mentioned Charter right.
The opposite view, according to which the invocation of s. 33 changes the content or

meaning of the prescribed Charter rights or freedoms, would lead to the conclusion that rights and
freedoms have one meaning before s. 33 is invoked, a different one during the period of a s. 33
declaration, and then a meaning that reverts to its original after the declaration has expired.
However, nothing in either the text or the purpose of s. 33 suggests that it functions in a way that
Charter rights and freedoms have this chameleon-like nature – with meanings that change
depending on whether a s. 33 declaration is itself in effect or has expired. The Charter is not written
in disappearing ink that comes and goes every five years according to whether Parliament or a
legislature has invoked s. 33. To the contrary, both the language of s. 33 and the operation of the
five-year sunset provision demand that the content of the rights themselves remains unchanged.
[86]

A conclusion otherwise would seem to be illogical and should not be taken to have been

intended by the makers of our Constitution. In the words of Cartwright J. (as he then was) in
Vandekerckhove v Township of Middleton, [1962] SCR 75 [Vandekerckhove], “There is ample
authority for the proposition that when the language used by the legislature admits of two
constructions one of which would lead to obvious injustice or absurdity the courts act on the view
that such a result could not have been intended” (at 78–79).
[87]

In R v McIntosh, [1995] 1 SCR 686 at para 81, McLachlin J. (as she then was) noted that

although “Parliament can legislate illogically if it so desires…the courts should not quickly make
the assumption that it intends to do so”. Albeit in dissent in McIntosh, McLachlin J.’s instruction
accords with the direction given in other cases, which hold that “[a]bsent a clear indication to the
contrary, the courts must impute a rational intent to Parliament” (at para 81, see also Morgentaler
v The Queen, [1976] 1 SCR 616 at 676; Rizzo & Rizzo Shoes Ltd. (Re), [1998] 1 SCR 27 at para 27;
Reference re Supreme Court Act, ss. 5 and 6, 2014 SCC 21 at para 148, [2014] 1 SCR 433).
[88]

These cases dealt with statutory interpretation, the methods of which cannot be

unquestionably applied to constitutional documents. However, if Parliament is to benefit from a
presumption of non-absurdity, so too should the same presumption apply to the makers of the
Constitution who were concerned with crafting the country’s foundational laws that are far more

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

[85]

Page 27

difficult to amend. Moreover, the reasons why the canons of statutory interpretation do not always
apply offer no justification for not considering these principles when assigning meaning to the

[89]

The main difference between constitutional interpretation and statutory interpretation goes

to the living, evolving nature of constitutional norms (see Hunter v Southam Inc., [1984] 2 SCR
145 at 155). This difference has no bearing upon the readiness with which these norms might
countenance absurdity. Indeed, when interpreting the Charter, the Supreme Court has found that
it “should be interpreted in a way that maintains its underlying values and its internal coherence”
(Health Services and Support – Facilities Subsector Bargaining Assn. v British Columbia, 2007
SCC 27 at para 80, [2007] 2 SCR 391 (emphasis added)). The concern for internal coherence and
non-absurdity are two sides of the same coin.
[90]

To return to the words of McLachlin J. in McIntosh, given that there is no “clear indication”

in the text of s. 33 that it is intended that the meaning of Charter rights are to shift back and forth,
“the courts should not quickly make the assumption that [Parliament] intend[ed] to do so” (at
para 81). As Cartwright J. suggested in Vandekerckhove, we should therefore opt for the nonabsurd construction that remains available – that s. 33 does not have this effect.
[91]

In summary, a declaration made pursuant to s. 33 of the Charter does not serve to modify

the content of the specified rights and freedoms. Rather, the meaning of the right or freedom is
unaffected by the declaration. Instead, s. 33 insulates the statute in question from the application
of the rights mentioned in the declaration, such that the statute operates without regard to these
provisions, sheltered from the otherwise invalidating effect of s. 52 of the Constitution Act, 1982.
[92]

Ultimately, as has been noted, the Government does not directly suggest that a s. 33

declaration somehow modifies the content or meaning of any right referred to therein. It also agrees
that a s. 33 declaration has the sheltering effect that has just been described. However, it asserts
that the declaration has the further effect of removing any scope for judicial review of whether the
legislation limits the rights mentioned in the s. 33 declaration. In advancing the latter idea, it asserts
that, in effect, the Charter rights disappear completely – leaving no basis for the court to scrutinize
whether the legislation limits or conflicts with the rights specified in the declaration. This argument
is addressed in the next section of these reasons.

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

Constitution.

Page 28

6.
[93]

The constitutional text does not remove the Court’s jurisdiction

To reiterate, the words of s. 33 must be understood, at minimum, to have the effect of

protecting the statute in question from the application of the rights mentioned in the declaration,

would otherwise result from s. 52(1) of the Constitution Act, 1982. UR Pride’s submission is that
s. 33 does nothing more. The starting point for its position is the use of operate in s. 33(1) and
operation in s. 33(2). UR Pride adopts the view taken by Grégoire Webber, who argues that these
words “help orient a reading of the legal effect of the clause that is focused on legislation and its
operation and not on rights or review” (“Notwithstanding rights, review, or remedy? On the
notwithstanding clause and the operation of legislation” (2021) 71 UTLJ 510 at 518). UR Pride
makes other text-based arguments grounded on the writings of, among others, Robert Leckey &
Eric Mendelsohn, “The Notwithstanding Clause: Legislatures, Courts, and the Electorate” (2022)
72 UTLJ 189 [Leckey and Mendelsohn].
[94]

The Government’s contention that a s. 33 declaration has additional effects is focused on

the idea that, because (as it puts it) the rights mentioned in the declaration are “inapplicable”, there
is no basis for the Court to review whether the Act or provision operates in a way that limits those
rights. The Government’s submissions are reminiscent of the views of Maxime St-Hilaire, Xavier
Foccroulle Ménard & Antoine Dutrisac (“Judicial Declarations Notwithstanding the Use of the
Notwithstanding Clause? A Response to a (Non-) Rejoinder”, in Peter L. Biro, ed, The
Notwithstanding Clause and the Canadian Charter: Rights, Reforms, and Controversies
(Montreal: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 2024) 132 at 142).
[95]

In advancing this position, the Government argues that comparing the French version of

the words a effet with other sections of the Constitution, notably s. 32(2) which delayed the effect
of s. 15 of the Charter for three years after its adoption, renders the Charter rights inapplicable in
the way just described when subject to a s. 33 declaration. The Government further submits that
the location of s. 33 under the heading “Application of Charter/Application de la charte” and the
marginal note above s. 33(1) “Exception where express declaration/Dérogation par déclaration
expresse” supports its position that a s. 33 declaration operates “as an ‘exception’ to the Charter’s
‘application’”. The Government also argues that the words as it would have but for/a l’effet qu’elle
aurait sauf in s. 33(2) reinforces the conclusion that a law that validly invokes s. 33 “must be

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

such that the statute operates without regard to these provisions, sheltered from the effect that

Page 29

treated as though the Charter provisions selected do not apply”. The Government asserts that the
word operate in s. 33(1) is intrinsically connected to the words following it: notwithstanding a
provision included in section 2 or sections 7 to 15 of [the] Charter. It stresses the word

the selected Charter rights, which in its view would mean that the Charter provisions are
inapplicable and therefore not subject to judicial review for any inconsistency with the law. The
Government maintains that a s. 33 declaration gives a law “constitutional priority in the event of a
potential conflict” and, therefore, cannot be inconsistent with the Charter provisions (citing
Geoffrey Sigalet, “Notwithstanding Judicial Review” at 171).
[96]

There is some cogency in the Government’s position that a s. 33 declaration renders a

specified Charter right inapplicable to the legislation, to use the Government’s preferred term, if
that term is understood as meaning, “incapable of being applied (to some case)” (Oxford English
Dictionary Online (Oxford University Press, March 2025) sub verbo “inapplicable” [OED
Online]). However, there are three caveats that lead to the conclusion that, based on the
constitutional text alone, it cannot be said that the courts have no role to determine if the legislation
that is subject to a s. 33 declaration nonetheless limits such rights.
[97]

The first qualification relates to aspects of the text of s. 33 that the Government’s argument

largely ignores. The Government accuses UR Pride of taking a “literalist approach” and being
“hyper focused” on the words operate (in s. 33(1)) and operation (in s. 33(2)). However, not only
do the Government’s submissions ignore that these words are used in the English text of s. 33, but
it also ascribes an unusual meaning to those words by focusing on the French text of the
Constitution.
[98]

In keeping with the principles of bilingual constitutional interpretation discussed earlier,

both language versions must be accounted for when ascribing meaning to the constitutional text.
Properly interpretating s. 33 requires paying attention to two subject–verb predicate relationships:
(1) the declaration “is in effect” or “shall cease to have effect” (“en vigueur” or “cesse d’avoir
effet”) (see ss. 33(2) and (3)); and (2) the Act or provision thereof “operates” or “shall have such
operation” (“a effet” or “a l’effet”) (see ss. 33(1) and (2)).

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

notwithstanding/indépendamment to support its contention that the law becomes paramount over

Page 30

[99]

The jurisdiction issue also depends on the legal effect of a declaration on its object – the

Act or provisions affected by the declaration. This, in turn, demands the bilingual interpretation of
the words operates/operation and a effet. The OED Online defines operation as the “Power to
the word effet in the legal sense has been defined to mean “Conséquence juridique d’un acte, d’un
fait, d’une décision” (H. Reid and S. Reid, Dictionnaire de droit québécois et canadien, 6th ed
(Wilson & Lafleur, 2023) sub verbo “effet”; see also Dictionnaire de l’Académie française, 9th ed
(1992–2024) sub verbo “effet”. Thus, a effet may be translated as having a legal consequence of
an act, fact or decision. It is therefore a term that can be seen to be more ambiguous than the word
operation in English since the French definition does not describe what comes of the legal
consequence, while the English definition connotes operation as giving power “to operate or
produce effects; efficacy, force” to its subject, in this case, the Act or provision that is the object
of the s. 33 declaration.
[100] Not only is the French meaning more ambiguous, but a effet can also have a broader
meaning than the English words operate or operation. In the Government of Canada’s terminology
and linguistic data bank, the term “avoir effet” – the infinitive verb of “a effet” – in the practice
and procedural law context carries the same meanings as “have force and effect”, “have effect”,
“have force”, “have force or effect”, “have operation”, and “be operative” in English (see
Government of Canada, TERMIUM Plus, online). Given this, the word a effet can either refer to
“having force and effect”, which implies validity, or simply mean “operation” as earlier described.
As can be seen, the latter interpretation is the only meaning given to the English words, for which
this narrower reading should be favoured according to the rules of interpretation.
[101] Accounting for all of this, an earlier expressed conclusion stands: on the face of both the
English and French versions of s. 33(1) and s. 33(2), the object of a s. 33 declaration is the Act of
Parliament or the provincial legislature, as the case may be. The object of a s. 33 declaration is not
the Charter right itself.
[102] This stands in contrast to s. 32(2), by which the coming into force of s. 15 of the Charter
was delayed. That provision states that s. 15 “shall not have effect until three years after [s. 32]
comes into force” / “n’a d’effet que trois ans après l’entrée en vigueur du [s. 32]”. This bears

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

operate or produce effects; efficacy, force. Now chiefly Law” (emphasis in original). In French,

Page 31

emphasis because, in oral argument, the Government stressed that, as there is no contention that
the legal effect of s. 32(2) was to make judicial review of s. 15 compliance unavailable for three
years since the right was not yet applicable, the use of a effet in the French version of s. 33,

the Charter provisions included in the declaration so as to also bar judicial review. However, it is
a complete answer to this argument that, in contrast to ss. 33(1) and 33(2) where the subject of the
verb is the legislation, in s. 32(2) the subject of the verb is the right itself.
[103] Throughout its factum, the Government couched its argument in the words of s. 52,
repeatedly asserting that a law that is the subject of a s. 33 declaration cannot be found to be
“inconsistent” with a right mentioned in the declaration. In analyzing this argument, it is
impossible to look past the fact that UR Pride is not asking for a declaration that s. 197.4 of the
Education Act is inconsistent with ss. 7 or 15(1) of the Charter, nor is it seeking a declaration that
the legislation is of no force or effect under s. 52 based on such a finding. Instead, UR Pride is
seeking a declaration that s. 197.4 limits such rights and that the limitation is not reasonable and
demonstrably justifiable, as required by s. 1 of the Charter. More substantively, stepping beyond
the words, there is no reason to conclude that simply because a s. 33 declaration protects legislation
from being declared to be of no force or effect because of Charter inconsistency under s. 52 of the
Constitution Act, 1982, a court has no jurisdiction to determine whether it operates in a way that
limits the Charter rights. Indeed, the Government’s argument otherwise simply assumes that the
Court’s jurisdiction is confined to issuing an order under s. 52, a point that is discussed later in
these reasons.
[104] The second qualification relates to an unequivocal feature of the constitutional text, namely
the period during which a s. 33 declaration may be valid. The period of Charter right
“inapplicability”, to use the Government’s preferred term, that may be created by a s. 33
declaration is subject to a strict temporal limit; by operation of law, the Charter right once more
becomes “applicable”, to again use that term, if the s. 33 declaration is not renewed after five years.
This is not, as the Government suggests, a hypothetical circumstance or event. It is, of course,
uncertain if the Legislature will enact a new s. 33 declaration. However, it is certain as a matter of
law that if the Legislature does not enact another s. 33 declaration, the Charter rights will again
apply.

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

interpreted consistently, would carry the meaning of temporarily suspending the applicability of

Page 32

[105] These two qualifications lead to a final overarching one: the meaning that the Government
seeks to assign to s. 33 by using the adjective inapplicable purports to oust the courts’ jurisdiction
in a case like this one based on inference or implication. In effect, the Government’s argument is

with the rights referenced in a s. 33 declaration. However, the only express limitation on the courts’
jurisdiction flows from the effect of s. 33(2). Both in English and in French, that provision
reinforces the conclusion that, when a s. 33 declaration is made, an Act or provision operates
notwithstanding certain rights; its effect is to negate the possibility that the legislation can be
declared to be of no force or effect pursuant to s. 52(1) of the Constitution Act, 1982, but it does
no more.
[106] Because of these three qualifications, the answer to the question of whether a court has
jurisdiction to determine if legislation sheltered under a s. 33 declaration limits Charter rights or
freedoms referenced in such a declaration does not follow from the use of the terms applicable
and inapplicable. Instead, an understanding of the effect of s. 33 on the courts’ jurisdiction must
come from a consideration of the actual text, in light of its purpose in the overall architecture of
Canada’s Constitution. This is the issue that will next be addressed.
7.

Purpose of s. 33 and its place in the constitutional structure

[107] It is uncontroversial, as the Government observes in its factum, that “s. 33 of the Charter
was a key part of federal-provincial negotiations that led to the adoption of the Charter in 1982”
and that the “constitutionalization of rights and freedoms aroused provincial concerns about the
expanded mandate accorded to judicial interpretations over those of an elected assembly”. Indeed,
many authors have identified the purpose of s. 33 to be to ensure that legislators have the last word
so as to preserve a form of parliamentary sovereignty (see, generally, Peter W. Hogg & Allison A.
Bushell, “The Charter Dialogue between Courts and Legislatures (or Perhaps the Charter of Rights
Isn’t Such a Bad Thing After All)” (1997) 35 Osgoode Hall LJ 75 [Hogg and Bushell]; Library of
Parliament, The Notwithstanding Clause of the Charter (HillStudies), Pub no 2018-17-E (Ottawa:
Library of Parliament, 2024); Leckey and Mendelsohn; Eric M. Adams & Erin R.J. Bower,
“Notwithstanding History: The Rights-Protecting Purposes of Section 33 of the Charter” (2022)
27:1 Rev Const Stud 121; Dwight Newman on Canada’s Notwithstanding Clause).

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

that the jurisdiction question is answered as soon as the word inapplicable is used in association

Page 33

[108] In this regard, the observations offered by the Québec Court of Appeal in Hak CA on this
[228] … It bears reminding that this section is the fruit of a federal-provincial
compromise (with the exception of Quebec) in the context of the process that led to the
patriation of the Constitution in 1982. As everyone knows, the decision to enshrine a
charter of rights and freedoms was the subject of much discussion — and dissent — during
the 1980-1981 Conference of First Ministers. For some, the idea that courts could set aside
statutes enacted by Parliament or provincial legislatures, insofar as these statutes violated
rights and freedoms guaranteed by such a charter, was a source of concern and reluctance.
There was a fear that the judiciary would usurp or neutralize the legislative power exercised
by an elected assembly, thereby running counter to the principle of parliamentary
sovereignty. The proposal to introduce an override power reserved for Parliament and the
provincial legislatures was intended as a [TRANSLATION] “counterweight” to the
broadened scope of judicial review resulting from the constitutionalization of rights and
freedoms.
(Footnote omitted)

[109] However, nothing in the remaining text or structure of the Charter, or the Constitution
more generally, suggests that the idea of a legislative last word should be equated with a legislature
having the only word on the issue of whether legislation limits Charter rights. To the contrary, an
examination of s. 33 in the context of the overall architecture of the Constitution leads to a different
conclusion.
[110] To reiterate, a declaration made under s. 33 has a finite period. It expires after five years,
although it can be renewed. Therefore, to have durable effect, the Legislature’s “last word” must
be repeatedly expressed during a period within which the legislators will face the scrutiny of the
ballot box. Recognizing this, many commentators have correctly pointed out that a proper
expression of the purpose of s. 33 must not only recognize that it preserves an element of
parliamentary sovereignty but that it does so in a way that encourages both continual and repeated
democratic accountability. It also does so in a way that contemplates dialogue between the
legislature, which may exercise the power to override certain guaranteed Charter rights and
freedoms, and the courts, which are given the responsibility for interpreting (assigning meaning
to) those guaranteed rights and freedoms (see Hogg and Bushell at 82–84; Dwight Newman on
Canada’s Notwithstanding Clause at 223 and 227; Leckey and Mendelsohn at 198–203; Eric M.
Adams & Erin R.J. Bower, “Notwithstanding History: The Rights-Protecting Purposes of Section
33 of the Charter” (2022) 27:1 Rev Const Stud 121 at 139, 142; Ian Peach & Richard Mailey,

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

subject are apposite:

Page 34

“Weaving Section 33 into the Charter Project: Citizen Led Oversight as a Potential Way Out of
the Legitimacy Conundrum” (2023) 32:3 Const Forum Const 53 at 56–57).

literature. Indeed, the Supreme Court has provided guidance that is relevant to this issue, pointing
in a decidedly different direction than the one suggested by the Government.
[112] As the Court noted in Vriend, “[w]hen the Charter was introduced, Canada went, in the
words of former Chief Justice Brian Dickson, from a system of Parliamentary supremacy to
constitutional supremacy” (at para 131, see also Reference re Secession of Québec, [1998] 2 SCR
217 at para 72, and Power at para 55). A dialogical relationship of mutual respect between the
courts and the legislatures was behind the “redefinition of our democracy” that accompanied the
adoption of the Charter (M. v H., [1999] 2 SCR 3 at para 78). This shift, which Vriend emphasized,
was “the deliberate choice of our provincial and federal legislatures” (at para 132) and assigned
the courts as trustees of the Charter, including as to its interpretation. The instruction given in
Vriend around this idea provides important context for the proper understanding of the effect of
s. 33. It merits reproduction at length:
[134] To respond, it should be emphasized again that our Charter’s introduction and the
consequential remedial role of the courts were choices of the Canadian people through their
elected representatives as part of a redefinition of our democracy. Our constitutional design
was refashioned to state that henceforth the legislatures and executive must perform their
roles in conformity with the newly conferred constitutional rights and freedoms. That the
courts were the trustees of these rights insofar as disputes arose concerning their
interpretation was a necessary part of this new design.
[135] So courts in their trustee or arbiter role must perforce scrutinize the work of the
legislature and executive not in the name of the courts, but in the interests of the new social
contract that was democratically chosen. All of this is implied in the power given to the
courts under s. 24 of the Charter and s. 52 of the Constitution Act, 1982.
[136] Because the courts are independent from the executive and legislature, litigants
and citizens generally can rely on the courts to make reasoned and principled decisions
according to the dictates of the constitution even though specific decisions may not be
universally acclaimed. In carrying out their duties, courts are not to second-guess
legislatures and the executives; they are not to make value judgments on what they regard
as the proper policy choice; this is for the other branches. Rather, the courts are to uphold
the Constitution and have been expressly invited to perform that role by the Constitution
itself. But respect by the courts for the legislature and executive role is as important as
ensuring that the other branches respect each others’ role and the role of the courts.
(Emphasis added)

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

[111] The recognition of these broader purposes of s. 33 finds support in more than the academic

Page 35

[113] These are the paragraphs that preceded the previously discussed statement, relied upon by
the Government, that “s. 33, the notwithstanding clause, establishes that the final word in our
constitutional structure is in fact left to the legislature and not the courts”. The full paragraph

[137] This mutual respect is in some ways expressed in the provisions of our constitution
as shown by the wording of certain of the constitutional rights themselves. For example,
s. 7 of the Charter speaks of no denial of the rights therein except in accordance with the
principles of fundamental justice, which include the process of law and legislative action.
Section 1 and the jurisprudence under it are also important to ensure respect for legislative
action and the collective or societal interests represented by legislation. In addition, as will
be discussed below, in fashioning a remedy with regard to a Charter violation, a court must
be mindful of the role of the legislature. Moreover, s. 33, the notwithstanding clause,
establishes that the final word in our constitutional structure is in fact left to the legislature
and not the courts (see P. Hogg and A. Bushell, “The Charter Dialogue Between Courts
and Legislatures” (1997), 35 Osgoode Hall L.J. 75).
(Emphasis added)

[114] The emphasized words make the important point that s. 33 exemplifies how the remedy of
reading in a prohibited ground does not limit the legislative process or democratic decisionmaking. The comment recognizes that, if a Legislature is unhappy with a court’s conclusion on
the issue, it can always exercise its power under s. 33 and allow legislation to operate. The direction
given by the Supreme Court in Vriend is thus consistent with the proposition already expressed,
namely that the use of the notwithstanding clause allows legislation to work even though the courts
may have determined that the legislation limits a Charter right or freedom.
[115] Institutional dialogue among the branches of government presupposes an exchange of
views that is vital to the democratic process. Vriend expanded upon this idea:
[138] As I view the matter, the Charter has given rise to a more dynamic interaction
among the branches of governance. This interaction has been aptly described as a
“dialogue” by some (see e.g. Hogg and Bushell, supra). In reviewing legislative
enactments and executive decisions to ensure constitutional validity, the courts speak to
the legislative and executive branches. As has been pointed out, most of the legislation held
not to pass constitutional muster has been followed by new legislation designed to
accomplish similar objectives (see Hogg and Bushell, supra, at p. 82). By doing this, the
legislature responds to the courts; hence the dialogue among the branches.
[139] To my mind, a great value of judicial review and this dialogue among the branches
is that each of the branches is made somewhat accountable to the other. The work of the
legislature is reviewed by the courts and the work of the court in its decisions can be reacted
to by the legislature in the passing of new legislation (or even overarching laws under s. 33
of the Charter). This dialogue between and accountability of each of the branches have the
effect of enhancing the democratic process, not denying it.

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

containing the words cited by the Government states as follows:

Page 36

(See also, Bell ExpressVu Limited Partnership v Rex, 2002 SCC 42 at para 65, [2002] 2 SCR 559.)
[116] Adopting the Government’s position that the pre-emptive use of s. 33 would foreclose the

Constitution. There is no principled reason why the courts’ voice on whether legislation limits
rights is legitimate if it is heard before s. 33 is invoked, but not after. Although said in a different
context, the caution expressed by the Alberta Court of Appeal, that the “resulting dialogue between
the courts and Parliament would be incomplete if the voices of courts … fell silent” (R v Arcand,
2010 ABCA 363 at para 89, 264 CCC (3d) 134), aptly describes the situation that would prevail if
the courts are removed from the discourse between the courts and legislatures and Parliament when
s. 33 is used pre-emptively. Indeed, dialogue would become monologue.
[117] Yet, the Government contends that the Constitution dictates that, while the courts have a
legitimate role in assessing whether legislation limits Charter rights before a s. 33 declaration is
made, that role disappears when s. 33 is invoked prospectively. In doing so, it draws on Hak CA,
which came to a different conclusion than as expressed in these reasons as to the jurisdiction of
the courts following a s. 33 declaration. While many statements from that decision accord with
these reasons, these reasons do not adopt that Court’s interpretation of the effect of a pre-emptive
declaration made under s. 33 of the Charter.
[118] As part of its justification for concluding that the invocation of s. 33 insulates legislation
from judicial review, the Québec Court of Appeal wrote that “to rule otherwise would be
tantamount to indirectly doing what cannot be done directly”. It went on to say:
[349] … Indeed, it would be contradictory to allow the legislature to use s. 33 to escape
the grasp of one or the other of ss. 2 or 7 to 15 of the Canadian Charter (including in
relation to s. 1) and the effects of s. 52(1) of the CA 1982, while subjecting the statute to
judicial review of its compliance with these very provisions, as if it had not been exempted
from their application. In a way, this would impose a kind of penalty for the use of s. 33:
the legislature would be free to invoke this section and declare that such and such a statute
has effect notwithstanding ss. 2 or 7 to 15, but, if it did so, it would have to explain itself
before the courts in the event of a legal challenge. It would then have to either try to show
that the statute complies with these provisions (by arguing that there is no infringement or
that the infringement, if any, is justified under s. 1 and, paradoxically, that recourse to art.
33 is unnecessary) or concede the infringement or lack of justification (expressly or by
failing to defend itself) — all of this despite the fact that, given s. 33, the validity and effect
of the statute cannot be impugned.

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

important dialogue that the Supreme Court has suggested was envisaged by the drafters of our

Page 37

[119] Respectfully, judicial review of legislation following a pre-emptive s. 33 declaration does
not involve the court doing indirectly what it cannot do directly. More specifically, it is not
inconsistent with the Legislature’s right to have the final word on the operation of the statute, as

the declaration and any renewal. Judicial scrutiny is not a form of penalty for the use of s. 33;
rather, it is what the Constitution contemplates as a salutary mechanism of dialogue. The
government can decide if it will defend against such litigation by attempting to show that the
legislation exempted from being declared invalid on Charter grounds nonetheless operates in a
way that reasonably limits those rights. When called upon to do so, the government may respond
in many different ways, a point returned to later in these reasons. In any event, the Court’s function
is no different than if the litigation had occurred before s. 33 was invoked.
[120] Returning to Hak CA, the Québec Court of Appeal also wrote as follows:
[351] Absent such a constitutional review, determining the correctness of the
legislature’s political and legal choice in invoking s. 33 of the Canadian Charter is
therefore left to the citizens, who will make their point of view known through the tools of
parliamentary democracy (e.g. elections, lobbying of deputies, petitions submitted to
legislature) and those that the Constitution places at the disposal of any person or group
wishing to make their opinion known (such as the exercise of freedom of expression or
freedom of peaceful assembly).

[121] The premise that the decision to invoke s. 33 is a political one which is beyond judicial
purview is clearly correct. Its review on this account is left solely to the electorate. Indeed, the
Constitution ensures that this occurs regularly by restricting the period of a s. 33 declaration to five
years. As per Ford, the Court’s role in determining the legality of the decision to invoke s. 33 is
limited to a review of form only. However, for the reasons already given, this does not mean that
the use of s. 33 defines the content of Charter rights and freedoms or that interpreting those rights
and freedoms, and thus whether the legislation limits them, becomes solely a political rather than
a legal question.
[122] The point of explaining why a s. 33 declaration does not modify the content of the rights
guaranteed by the referenced Charter provisions is to demonstrate that there exists an appropriate
legal standard against which a court is able to determine whether the operation of legislation that
enjoys the benefit of a s. 33 declaration unreasonably limits those rights. The legal criteria that
could be brought to bear in a judicial review are the same, whether a s. 33 declaration has been

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

the legislation remains immune from any declaration of invalidity pursuant to s. 52 for the term of

Page 38

made or not. This fact is important, because it answers any concern that an examination of whether
s. 197.4 of the Education Act limits any of the delineated Charter rights in some way exceeds the
courts’ constitutional role. Clearly, but for the invocation of s. 33 of the Charter, the courts are not
Court of Appeal in Hak CA, “the question of whether a statute infringes ss. 2 or 7 to 15 of the
Canadian Charter, without being justified under s. 1, is one courts can ordinarily answer by using
the tools and methods specific to the law (i.e., ‘by the application of legal principles and
techniques’), which is what traditionally characterizes the ‘justiciability’ of a debate, without
regard to its political dimensions” (at para 355, footnotes omitted). A corollary of the conclusion
that the content or meaning of the Charter rights has not changed because of the s. 33 declaration
is that the courts are equally equipped to answer the question of whether the legislation operates
to limit the mentioned Charter rights after the declaration has been made as before.
[123] Hak CA implicitly asserts that a judicial review after s. 33 has been invoked prospectively
is, in some way, contrary to democratic principles or the constitutional order more generally.
However, the proposition that judicial review is illegitimate when s. 33 is invoked prospectively
presupposes that the Constitution attaches no importance to any interest that the electorate may
have in the legal consequences associated with the use of s. 33. That notion ignores the positive
role that judicial review can play in Canada’s democracy. Again, this is an idea expressed in
Vriend:
[140] There is also another aspect of judicial review that promotes democratic values.
Although a court’s invalidation of legislation usually involves negating the will of the
majority, we must remember that the concept of democracy is broader than the notion of
majority rule, fundamental as that may be. In this respect, we would do well to heed the
words of Dickson C.J. in [R v Oakes, [1986] 1 SCR 103] at p. 136:
The Court must be guided by the values and principles essential to a free
and democratic society which I believe to embody, to name but a few,
respect for the inherent dignity of the human person, commitment to social
justice and equality, accommodation of a wide variety of beliefs, respect
for cultural and group identity, and faith in social and political institutions
which enhance the participation of individuals and groups in society.

[124] The proper functioning of our constitutional democracy is enhanced, not impaired, if
Canada’s citizens, and legislators alike, are made aware when legislation that is allowed to operate
by virtue of s. 33 does so in a way that limits Charter rights and freedoms.

2025 SKCA 74 (CanLII)

only equipped to answer this question but are called upon to do so. Indeed, as noted by the Québec