Rwanda | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Rwanda At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? No Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? No Legal Gender Recognition Possible? No LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? No Last Update: March 12, 2026 Same-sex intimacy is not criminalized in Rwanda. However, the Human Rights First Rwanda Association, in a 2025 submission to the UN Human Rights Committee, highlighted ongoing law enforcement abuses affecting transgender persons. The submission notes that transgender individuals face heightened risks of harassment during identity checks, including reports of arbitrary arrests on grounds such as “vagrancy” or “public order” offenses. These practices have a disproportionate impact on transgender persons, increasing their vulnerability to discrimination, insecurity, and violations of their fundamental rights. Rainbow Migration reported in 2022 that the country is “now a source country for people seeking asylum in the UK based on their sexual orientation,” fleeing situations of arbitrary arrests, detention, and other forms of ill-treatment . Although LGBTIQ organizations cannot register openly , activists are pushing for increased recognition and protection from abuse, and Rwandan activists held a public Pride event in 2021. In June 2024, the government of Rwanda adopted the NGO Law No. 058/2024 . The legal framework contains provisions that raise concerns regarding potential limitations on the freedom of association for LGBTIQ organizations. Article 7, which requires NGOs to operate in accordance with “national values,” and Article 12, which grants the Rwanda Governance Board (RGB) broad authority to register, monitor, and suspend NGOs for activities deemed “contrary to law or public order,” create an enabling environment for arbitrary or discriminatory limitations on the freedom of association for LGBTIQ groups. The lived experience of LGBTIQ people is that many are forced to live in hiding due to widespread rejection, discrimination, and abuse. A study conducted in 2021 found that while the majority of Rwandans agreed with the statement that “It is important not to discriminate against LGBTQ+,” a much smaller percentage indicated that they personally “accept” LGBTQ+ people. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International