Six anti-LGBTQ+ hate crimes reported a week in Switzerland - SWI swissinfo.ch Jump to home page Jump to navigation Jump to horizontal navigation Go to language selection Jump to content The Swiss voice in the world since 1935 Home About us Search Sections Geopolitics Democracy Science Swiss Identity Economy Swiss Abroad Latest News Swiss Films Videos Podcasts Debates Special Reports Opinions Newsletters Ask Swissinfo Guide to Switzerland Switzerland How-To Education in Switzerland Tourism Trends Housing in Switzerland Follow us Why you can trust Swissinfo en English en Deutsch de Français fr Italiano it Español es Português pt 日本語 ja العربية ar 中文 zh Русский ru My profile Bookmarks Personal feed Sign in Personal feed Sign in to add topics to your feed. Sign in now Bookmarks Sign in to add articles to your saved list. Sign in now Geopolitics Democracy Science Swiss Identity Economy Swiss Abroad International Geneva Human rights Global health Geneva organisations Global trade Humanitarian aid Swiss diplomacy Neutrality International cooperation Top Stories Six takeaways from the rejection of the neutrality initiative Read more: Six takeaways from the rejection of the neutrality initiative Swiss vote on how neutrality should be understood Read more: Swiss vote on how neutrality should be understood What’s behind the US decision not to invite OSCE election observers Read more: What’s behind the US decision not to invite OSCE election observers An advocate for the laws of war in a world that no longer believes in them Read more: An advocate for the laws of war in a world that no longer believes in them Podcasts Inside Geneva Read more: Inside Geneva Newsletter Our newsletter on geopolitics Read more: Our newsletter on geopolitics International Geneva Read more: International Geneva Swiss democracy Information wars Digital Democracy Global elections Top stories Swiss neutrality and food security initiatives suffer hefty defeat Read more: Swiss neutrality and food security initiatives suffer hefty defeat Swiss democracy in the crosshairs of Russian propaganda Read more: Swiss democracy in the crosshairs of Russian propaganda What’s behind the US decision not to invite OSCE election observers Read more: What’s behind the US decision not to invite OSCE election observers Swiss democracy How Swiss direct democracy works Read more: How Swiss direct democracy works Newsletter Our democracy newsletter Read more: Our democracy newsletter Climate solutions Glaciers & permafrost CO2 reduction Climate adaptation Energy transition Research frontiers Swiss AI Space research Top stories Fuel threat lingers beneath buried Swiss mountain village Read more: Fuel threat lingers beneath buried Swiss mountain village Swiss heatwaves linked to 600 premature deaths Read more: Swiss heatwaves linked to 600 premature deaths Switzerland’s worst-case climate scenario now more likely, say scientists Read more: Switzerland’s worst-case climate scenario now more likely, say scientists Cyber flaws in solar systems pose risks to Swiss power grid Read more: Cyber flaws in solar systems pose risks to Swiss power grid Podcasts The Swiss Connection Podcast: Hear Swiss science stories for the world Read more: The Swiss Connection Podcast: Hear Swiss science stories for the world Newsletter Our science newsletter Read more: Our science newsletter Demographics Assisted suicide Culture Swiss cinema Swiss fine arts Future of Work AI & Work History Top stories Self-determination over religious freedom: Zurich sends strong signal on assisted dying Read more: Self-determination over religious freedom: Zurich sends strong signal on assisted dying Nuclidium CEO: ‘Our challenge remains the demonstration of clinical efficacy and utility’ Read more: Nuclidium CEO: ‘Our challenge remains the demonstration of clinical efficacy and utility’ Having children is a luxury in Switzerland. Is the US next? Read more: Having children is a luxury in Switzerland. Is the US next? How poring over old journals gives insight into right-wing extremism today Read more: How poring over old journals gives insight into right-wing extremism today Debate To what extent do you think assisted suicide should be a legally available option to those who want to end their lives? Read more: To what extent do you think assisted suicide should be a legally available option to those who want to end their lives? Newsletter Culture stories by SWI swissinfo.ch Read more: Culture stories by SWI swissinfo.ch Medicine access Drug pricing Patient safety Pharma supply chains Health systems Health innovation Prevention AI and medicine New treatments Agribusiness Food supply chains Food safety Top stories Swiss heatwaves linked to 600 premature deaths Read more: Swiss heatwaves linked to 600 premature deaths How a handful of big agriculture companies have taken over food production Read more: How a handful of big agriculture companies have taken over food production Why Putin is placing Nestlé under compulsory administration Read more: Why Putin is placing Nestlé under compulsory administration Revolut seeks to challenge Swiss banking sector Read more: Revolut seeks to challenge Swiss banking sector How transparent is a Swiss hospital bill really? Read more: How transparent is a Swiss hospital bill really? Iron ore trader Radiant alleges Glencore hid their ties from audited records Read more: Iron ore trader Radiant alleges Glencore hid their ties from audited records Podcasts Reality hits: hard truths come to light in the final episode of ‘Lost Cells’ Read more: Reality hits: hard truths come to light in the final episode of ‘Lost Cells’ Newsletter Business stories by SWI swissinfo.ch Read more: Business stories by SWI swissinfo.ch Swiss abroad community Swiss politics Votes Moving abroad Swiss oddities Top stories Are the Swiss Abroad a drain or a gain for Switzerland? Read more: Are the Swiss Abroad a drain or a gain for Switzerland? Twenty-five years after 9/11: ‘I’ve never spoken about it until now’ Read more: Twenty-five years after 9/11: ‘I’ve never spoken about it until now’ From grey skies to heatwaves: climate drives Swiss abroad Read more: From grey skies to heatwaves: climate drives Swiss abroad Stay in touch with Switzerland The SWIplus app: your connection to Switzerland Read more: The SWIplus app: your connection to Switzerland News Six anti-LGBTQ+ hate crimes reported a week in Switzerland Six hate crimes per week against LGBTIQ+ Keystone-SDA On average, almost six hate crimes are reported a week against LGBTQ+ people in Switzerland. Last year there were 309 cases, according to the LGBTIQ Helpline. Since 2020, reports have increased fivefold. Listen to the article Listening the article Toggle language selector Select your language Close English (US) English (British) Generated with artificial intelligence. Listening: Six anti-LGBTQ+ hate crimes reported a week in Switzerland Close Share This content was published on May 9, 2025 - 14:04 2 minutes Keystone-SDA Other languages: 2 Italiano it Sei crimini d’odio a settimana contro LGBTIQ+ Original Read more: Sei crimini d’odio a settimana contro LGBTIQ+ Português pt Seis crimes de ódio anti-LGBTQ+ registrados por semana na Suíça Read more: Seis crimes de ódio anti-LGBTQ+ registrados por semana na Suíça +Get the most important news from Switzerland in your inbox Half of all crimes involve trans people, said the Transgender Network Switzerland (TGNS), the Swiss Lesbian Organisation (LOS) and Pink Cross in a statement on Friday. While Switzerland is celebrating LGBTQ+ visibility through the success of non-binary artist Nemo at Eurovision, it is crucial to remember that these advances coexist with a harsh everyday reality that is very much in evidence, the organisations continue. + Homophobia: a crime or a matter of opinion? Incidents recorded by the helpline include physical assault, verbal violence, sexual harassment and discrimination in employment, public institutions and the health sector. Since the creation of the service, reports of hate crimes and discrimination have only increased. The organisations deplore the lack of reaction from political circles. Another problem, they say, is the chronic underfunding of aid structures through private donations or foundation contributions. The LGBTIQ Helpline External link Translated from Italian by DeepL/ts We select the most relevant news for an international audience and use automatic translation tools such as DeepL to translate them into English. A journalist then reviews the translation for clarity and accuracy before publication. Providing you with automatically translated news gives us the time to write more in-depth articles. The news stories we select have been written and carefully fact-checked by an external editorial team from news agencies such as Bloomberg or Keystone. Did you find this explanation helpful? Please fill out the short survey below to help us understand your needs. External Content Don’t miss your chance to make a difference! Take our survey and share your thoughts. Related Stories Popular Stories News In compliance with the JTI standards More: SWI swissinfo.ch certified by the Journalism Trust Initiative You can find an overview of ongoing debates with our journalists here . Please join us! If you want to start a conversation about a topic raised in this article or want to report factual errors, email us at english@swissinfo.ch . Back to top Follow us Stay informed daily about news in Switzerland with our Briefing in the SWI plus app for the Swiss abroad. Imprint Data Privacy Statement Terms of Use Rights to content and liability Privacy settings Jobs Play SWI About us Annual Report 2025 Newsletters Podcasts Contact SWI swissinfo.ch - a branch of Swiss Broadcasting Corporation SRG SSR RTS SRF RSI RTR SWI swissinfo.ch - a branch of Swiss Broadcasting Corporation SRG SSR Close Sign in and personalize Swissinfo Follow Topics Stay up to date with your preferred topics. Bookmarks Save articles for later. Sign in Later Close Personal feed Close Select topics that interest you. Something went wrong. Please try again. Save Cancel /* Download_on_the_App_Store_Badge_DE_RGB_blk_092917 ","app-store-en":" Download_on_the_App_Store_Badge_US-UK_RGB_blk_4SVG_092917 ","app-store-fr":" Download_on_the_App_Store_Badge_FR_RGB_blk_100517 ","app-store-it":" Download_on_the_App_Store_Badge_IT_RGB_blk_100317 ","arrow-caret-down":" ","arrow-caret-left":" ","arrow-caret-right":" ","arrow-caret-top":" ","buzzsprout-amazon-music":" ","buzzsprout-apple-podcasts":" ","buzzsprout-castbox":" ","buzzsprout-castro":" ","buzzsprout-deezer":" ","buzzsprout-goodpods":" ","buzzsprout-iheartradio":" ","buzzsprout-listen-notes":" ","buzzsprout-overcast":" ","buzzsprout-pandora":" ","buzzsprout-player-fm":" ","buzzsprout-pocket-casts":" ","buzzsprout-podcast-addict":" ","buzzsprout-podcast-index":" ","buzzsprout-podchaser":" ","buzzsprout-spotify":" ","buzzsprout-subscribe-link":" ","buzzsprout-truefans":" ","buzzsprout-youtube":" ","caret-right":" ","carousel-next":" ","carousel-previous":" ","chevron-bottom":" ","chevron-down":" ","chevron-right":" ","chevron-top-small":" ","chevron-top":" ","double-arrow-caret-left":" ","double-arrow-caret-right":" ","flag-blank":" ","flag-es":" ","flag-gb":" ","flag-mx":" <path d=\"M10.4924 9.69024C10.