Same-sex marriage gets Guernsey States approval - BBC News BBC Homepage Skip to content Accessibility Help Your account Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live More menu More menu Search BBC Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Close menu BBC News Menu Home Climate World UK Business Tech Science Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures More BBC Verify Newsbeat Europe Guernsey Same-sex marriage gets Guernsey States approval Published 10 December 2015 Share close panel Share page Copy link About sharing Image source, Thinkstock Image caption, Those opposed to same-sex marriages said it could divide the island's community Same-sex marriage is set to be introduced in Guernsey after a vote by the island's government. Two alternative options for introducing same-sex civil partnerships or bringing in a single legal form for all - Union Civile - were rejected. The move to introduce same-sex marriage was approved 37-7. It is not clear when the legislation, which will be voted on separately, will come back to the States or when the law will come into effect. A Policy Council spokesman said it depends on the "priority given to the legislation" and time needed to draft it. He said at the earliest this "would not be before 2017". Ellie Jones, from the charity Liberate, said it was an historic day for Guernsey and that most of the comments in the States debate had been "extremely positive". Same-sex marriages In 2001 the Netherlands became the first country to allow same-sex marriages They are now legal in more than 20 countries Same-sex marriage was legalised in England and Wales in March 2014 and Scotland since December the same year Jersey has approved the drafting of legislation to permit same-sex marriages from 2017 Deputy Hunter Adam, who was one of those who proposed Union Civile, said: "Introduction of same-sex marriage at this time could be considered by some as a step too far." He said the issue had raised "strong emotions" and had the potential to cause "division within the community". Deputy David De Lisle, who suggested civil partnerships, said like England and Wales, the island should take it "one step at a time" to avoid creating a "divide in the community". The motions were heavily defeated 4-40 and 7-37 respectively. Image source, Thinkstock Image caption, Same-sex marriages are legal in more than 20 countries Chief Minister Jonathan Le Tocq said the Policy Council had considered all three options before deciding to propose same-sex marriage. He said: "[It is] more likely to attain international recognition as it brings Guernsey into line with other neighbouring jurisdictions." Deputy Le Tocq said it was a matter of "equality" and providing couples with the "same legal benefits and protections". He described the current marriage law, which dates to 1919, as "highly and unnecessarily confusing, ambiguous in places and certainly ripe for reform irrespective of other issues". More on this story Guernsey plans to scrap 'marriage' Published 1 June 2015 Marriage law 'most forward-looking' Published 29 May 2014 Minister backs same-sex adoption law Published 15 May 2015 Call for equal adoption rights Published 9 June 2014 'Woefully behind' in gay marriage Published 15 January 2014 Around the BBC Archive - The Gay Rights Movement Related internet links States of Guernsey Getting married in Guernsey The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. From other local news sites New section of pipe ready for repair to damaged sewage outfall External Guernsey Press Peak generosity: Mountain climb raises £22.5k for Les Bourgs in memory of Rose External Bailiwick Express Forward Guernsey wants to limit length of speeches during next week’s tax debate External Guernsey Press Can you 'restart a heart'? External Bailiwick Express Island politician proposes to cut aid budget for ten years External ITV.com First woman to take up nearly 800-year-old Bailiff role promises to 'dismantle barriers' External ITV.com Information about BBC links to other news sites The video playlist Watch our pick of standout clips from across the BBC Previous Next 1:31 The ups and downs of SpaceX's Starship test flights. 00:01:31, play video The ups and downs of SpaceX's Starship test flights 1:18 At the scene of counter-terrorism operation near RAF Fairford. 00:01:18, play video At the scene of counter-terrorism operation near RAF Fairford 0:39 Hundreds block Orange Order march in Northern Ireland. 00:00:39, play video Hundreds block Orange Order march in Northern Ireland 0:56 PM proposes NHS style social care system for England. 00:00:56, play video PM proposes NHS style social care system for England 1:13 Buckingham Palace hosts dance lessons. 00:01:13, play video Buckingham Palace hosts dance lessons 1:03 Is Labour's housing scheme a new idea, or an old Tory one? 00:01:03, play video Is Labour's housing scheme a new idea, or an old Tory one? 0:55 How to win an aura battle. 00:00:55, play video How to win an aura battle 1:35 The peculiar way Poirot got his walk. 00:01:35, play video The peculiar way Poirot got his walk 1:27 Could Manchester City lose some of its trophies? 00:01:27, play video Could Manchester City lose some of its trophies? 1:30 Using AI to detect fake goods online. 00:01:30, play video Using AI to detect fake goods online 0:47 'They've behaved so badly' says Man City fan. 00:00:47, play video 'They've behaved so badly' says Man City fan 1:10 Is it OK to take an iced coffee to a job interview? 00:01:10, play video Is it OK to take an iced coffee to a job interview? 1:09 What are the charges against Man City? 00:01:09, play video What are the charges against Man City? 0:35 Rory Stewart on his viral Newsnight moment. 00:00:35, play video Rory Stewart on his viral Newsnight moment 1:08 Why is the Pope in France? 00:01:08, play video Why is the Pope in France? 0:47 Should we ban the word 'awesome'? 00:00:47, play video Should we ban the word 'awesome'? 1:37 Question Time panel clash over welfare policy. 00:01:37, play video Question Time panel clash over welfare policy Top stories Five arrested as counter-terror police investigate major incident near RAF Fairford Published 1 hour ago What we know about RAF Fairford counter-terror probe Published 1 hour ago Burnham proposes NHS-style social care system for England Published 7 hours ago More to explore Celebrity Traitors 2 cast: Who are this year's 'big dogs' and dark horses? I was born while my mother was in an iron lung Killer Christa Pike to be executed within days - but her defence say she's a victim too Child's hidden letter found after 44 years I was angry at my husband - I didn't know he had dementia School holiday fines climb despite growing backlash 'Our wedding present left us gutted': Couple join dozens in car seller dispute US Politics Unspun: Cut through the noise with Anthony Zurcher's newsletter Could an iced coffee freeze you out of the job market? Elsewhere on the BBC Anne Hathaway and Jessica Chastain star in a psychological thriller How many dead people are on the internet? The hit podcast explores Thomas More's iconic text 'Utopia' Was Colin Norris wrongly convicted of killing his patients? Most read 1 Five arrested as counter-terror police investigate major incident near RAF Fairford 2 What we know about RAF Fairford counter-terror probe 3 Burnham proposes NHS-style social care system for England 4 No handshakes between Republic of Ireland and Israel 5 Ten NHS staff removed over Noah Woods data breach 6 Orange Order march row goes to heart of ongoing divisions in Northern Ireland 7 Two mass shootings in South Africa leave 27 dead 8 Killer Christa Pike to be executed within days - but her defence say she's a victim too 9 Celebrity Traitors 2 cast: Who are this year's 'big dogs' and dark horses? 10 Traitors star burgled after sharing holiday photos BBC News Services On your mobile On smart speakers Get news alerts Contact BBC News Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Careers BBC emails for you Advertise with us Copyright © 2026 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.