Human rights in Austria Amnesty International Human rights in Austria Human rights in Austria Which language would you like to use this site in? English Español Français Close English Español Français Who We Are How We’re Run Work with us What We Do Countries Get Involved Take Action Become a member Take an online course Latest News Campaigns Education Research Impact Search Donate Now ul" aria-expanded="false" aria-controls="mobile-menu" aria-label="Open navigation" > Who We Are Who We Are How We’re Run Work with us What We Do Countries Get Involved Get Involved Take Action Become a member Take an online course Latest Latest News Campaigns Education Research Impact Search Austria Amnesty International takes no position on issues of sovereignty or territorial disputes. Borders on this map are based on UN Geospatial data. © Amnesty International Back to Austria Austria 2025 The cost of living remained among the highest in the EU. Gender-based violence persisted and access to abortion was limited. Freedom of assembly and expression were at risk, including by restrictions on Palestinian solidarity slogans. Austria failed to guarantee guardianship for unaccompanied asylum-seeking children, and suspended family reunification. Anti-discrimination law remained inadequate and police were still not required to wear individual identification badges. Economic, social and cultural rights The number of individuals at risk of poverty and social exclusion remained high, affecting 16.9% of the population. Those most at risk included single-parent households, individuals with disabilities, refugees and migrants. The cost of living remained among the highest in the EU. While the government presented measures in September to regulate the rental market, it failed to implement a national housing strategy. In September, the government announced plans to introduce additional accessibility criteria for social assistance that would negatively affect refugees. 1 Women’s and girls’ rights In 2025, 15 cases of suspected femicides were reported. In November, the government presented a national action plan to address gender-based violence, involving civil society organizations in its development. Abortion was not fully decriminalized and was excluded from health insurance cover. Access to affordable safe abortion care remained limited in several federal states. In December, the parliament passed a law that banned the wearing of a hijab for girls aged under 14 years in schools, which was discriminatory and violated their rights including freedom of religion and expression. Freedom of expression and assembly In April, a German climate activist had her residence permit revoked due to accusations of “serious threats to public order or security”. The decision had been appealed but no final decision was made by year’s end. In July, parliament passed a law allowing police to use spyware on encrypted communications. In August, the minister of interior presented plans to substantially expand video surveillance in public places, despite concerns from civil society about harmful implications for freedom of peaceful assembly. Authorities continued to apply the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance (IHRA) working definition of antisemitism, leading to a chilling effect on freedom of expression. Police continued to fine Palestinian solidarity protesters for chanting “from the river to the sea, Palestine will be free”, leading to a blanket prohibition of this slogan violating freedom of expression. A ministerial decree remained in force stipulating that the slogan justified an initial suspicion of “condoning terrorist crimes” pursuant to criminal law. In April, a court declared the dispersal of an assembly due to this same chant to be unlawful. Refugees’ and migrants’ rights Austria failed to adopt a federal provision to guarantee legal guardianship for unaccompanied asylum-seeking children, despite government commitments and respective provisions deriving from the Common European Asylum System reform. In July the government suspended family reunification for six months, and in December continued the suspension until at least July 2026, thus effectively eliminating the only safe pathway to Austria for people seeking protection. 2 In July, the Ministry of Interior carried out the first deportation of a man to Syria, who reportedly disappeared afterwards. The UN Committee on Enforced Disappearances subsequently sent a letter to the Austrian government questioning the deported man’s whereabouts. Austria continued deportations to Syria. 3 In October, the Ministry of Interior carried out the first deportation to Afghanistan since the Taliban took power. 4 Discrimination Austria failed to ensure human-rights compliant anti-discrimination legislation at federal and regional levels. In March, criminal investigators reported a wave of hate crimes against LGBTI people. The number of anti-Muslim and antisemitic hate crimes remained high. Unlawful use of force Police were still not required to wear identification badges, impeding accountability. 5 Regulations regarding body-worn cameras were inconsistent. In October, a commission of inquiry declared the police operation at a protest camp at the Peršmanhof memorial unlawful and disproportionate. Right to a healthy environment Austria was yet to pass a climate protection act. Experts criticized a leaked draft act as inadequate because it did not include Austria’s target to achieve net zero by 2040. “Austria: Government threatens to further undermine social assistance”, 15 September (German only) ↩︎ “Austria: Planned restrictions on family reunification violate human rights”, 10 April (German only) ↩︎ “Austria: Amnesty International continues to warn against deportations to Syria”, 25 September (German only) ↩︎ “Dangerous breach: Austria hands people over to the Taliban for the first time”, 21 October (German only) ↩︎ “Austria: One year of the police misconduct investigation unit: A good start, but independence must be ensured”, 20 January (German only) ↩︎ GET THE AMNESTY INTERNATIONAL REPORT 2025/26 Azərbaycanca Azərbaycanca Հայերեն العربية Oʻzbekcha اردو Українська Türkmençe Türkçe 繁體中文 ไทย தமிழ் Тоҷикӣ Kiswahili Español Slovenščina සිංහල Русский Română Português Polski پښتو नेपाली Монгол хэл Bahasa Melayu 한국어 Кыргызча Қазақ тілі Bahasa Indonesia हिन्दी Ελληνικά Deutsch Français English دری 简体中文 Български বাংলা Беларуская Download About Us Contact Us How We’re Run Modern Slavery Act Statement Finances Resources Media Centre Human Rights Education Human Rights Courses Annual report archive Get Involved Join Take Action Volunteer Latest News Campaigns Research Work With Us If you are talented and passionate about human rights then Amnesty International wants to hear from you. Jobs & Internships Privacy Policy Website Terms of Use Accessibility Cookie Statement Permissions Refunds of Donations © 2026 Amnesty International Follow us on: Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram