ANNUAL REVIEW OF THE HUMAN RIGHTS SITUATION OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL, TRANS, AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
COVERING THE PERIOD OF JANUARY TO DECEMBER 2023

SLOVENIA
ASYLUM

Ljubljana march, the police failed to intervene in any of the
attacks, failed to identify, detain, or stop the perpetrators, and

Civil society continued supporting LGBT people fleeing
Ukraine. The opening of the Pride Festival addressed the lack
of adequate protection awarded to LGBTIQ+ asylum seekers in
Slovenia.

discouraged the victims from reporting, saying such attacks
are “just the way it is’’ on the day of Pride. Several civil society
organisations condemned the police’s lack of action, called
for hate crimes to be recorded, investigated, and perpetrators
held to account, and demanded firmer responses from the

BIAS-MOTIVATED SPEECH

Prime Minister and the Minister of Interior, the former taking

(see also under Bias-motivated Violence; and Freedom of

three days to react and the latter not making any statements.

Assembly)

A few days after Pride, LGBTIQ+ organisations held a press

Legebitra documented 17 cases of bias-motivated speech in
2023.

conference about the attacks, warning about the increase in
hate. Several passersby made anti-LGBT remarks.
In early July, the Commission for Petitions, Human Rights

TransAkcija documented 25 cases of direct bias-motivated

and Equal Opportunities convened an emergency meeting

speech in 2023. TransAkcija reported an additional 17 cases
of direct bias-motivated speech where the persons reporting
were witnesses to the event, and 27 cases where the reported
bias-motivated speech was in the media or other public

on homophobic and transphobic violence, concluding
that the Ministry of Labour, Family, Social Affairs and Equal
Opportunities should prepare and adopt the National Strategy
for LGBTIQ+ people.

messaging.

In late July, the Ministry of Labour, Family, Social Affairs,

The day before the Pride march, the Slovenian Democratic

and Equal Opportunities held a meeting with LGBTIQ+

Youth (SDM) party launched the ‘Two Sexes, One Truth’

organisations on how to best respond to the increase in anti-

campaign which states that there are “only men and women

LGBT hate crimes. The Ministry also discussed the National

‘’ and strongly opposes the legal gender recognition (LGR)

Strategy for LGBTIQ+ people as part of this effort (see more

law reform. The SDM’s press statement alleges that LGBT+
communities prioritise “the indoctrination of children based
on gender theory” and equates this with “psychological abuse”.
The statement also reads that defying the gender binary “harms
society as a whole”.

under Equality and Non-discrimination).
The government adopted an amendment to the Penal Code
which would increase sanctions on hate crimes based on the
victim’s sexual orientation and a number of other non-GIGESC
grounds.

BIAS-MOTIVATED VIOLENCE
(See also under Freedom of Assembly)
Several hate crimes were recorded again this year, but victims
remain reluctant to report incidents to the authorities.

EDUCATION
One of the leading right wing media websites posted an article
about a child who came out as trans. The article named the

Legebitra documented a total of nine hate crimes and three

school, quoted the principal, and shared other potentially

cases of vandalism this year.

identifying information, which was a violation of the child’s
right to privacy and protection from media. The parents are

As of 27 November, TransAkcija documented 77 cases of
reporting of direct transphobic violence or discrimination by a
victim of violence, and an additional 47 cases where the person
reporting the violence was a witness to the attack.

now in a legal battle regarding this situation.

EMPLOYMENT
A pedagogy student, who was doing a two-week internship at

Several people were assaulted and organisers and venues were

a primary school in Maribor, became a target of transphobic

targeted before, during, and after the Ljubljana Pride march

harassment and hate speech in April, with parents calling for

on 17 June and the Maribor Pride march on 16 September (see

her dismissal because of her trans identity. The media widely

more under Freedom of Assembly).

reported reported on the case. Civil society organisations
and the primary school stood in support of the teacher. She,

Pride organisers expressed serious concern that at the

<

however, did not finish her internship.

Index

>

EQUALITY AND NON-DISCRIMINATION
In October, State Secretary at the Ministry of Labour, Dan Juvan
(MDDSZ) committed to the preparation and publication of the
country’s first National Strategy for the Equality of LGBTIQ+

A young woman carrying a rainbow flag was assaulted at a bar.
Several rainbow flags were burnt around the city, which the
perpetrators filmed and shared on social media. Human rights
organisations and venues hosting events were also targeted

Persons and to engage in extensive consultations with civil

(see also under Bias-motivated Violence). The Pride organisers

society. The move follows up on the call of the Parliamentary

shared that such incidents had not happened for years and

Commission for Petitions, Human Rights, and Equal
Opportunities in 2022 that the Ministry of Labour, Family, Social
Affairs, and Equal Opportunities should prepare and adopt a

advised participants to take off Pride-related accessories
before and after Pride events. The Prime Minister, the Speaker
of Parliament, and the Ombudsperson condemned the

strategy. The strategy is expected in 2024.

violence.

FAMILY

The Pride march in Maribor, held on 20 September with the

The amendments of the Family Code, which introduced

motto ‘From Laws to Society’, was also attacked. Counter-

marriage equality and equal adoption rights in 2022, entered

protesters were chanting anti-LGBT slogans, assaulted several

into force on 1 February. Slovenia is now the first country in the

people, including a well-known LGBTIQ+ activist who was taken

former socialist bloc that has marriage equality in place. Several

to hospital. After the march, several others were attacked,

politicians and Slovenia’s President welcomed this important

verbally harassed, and eggs were thrown at them.

milestone (see here, here, and here). Marriage equality was
introduced thanks to the Constitutional Court’s ruling in July

The Minister for a Solidary Future, Minister of Culture, the

2022.

President, the Ombudsperson, Maribor’s mayor, civil society

345 couples in a registered partnership transformed their legal
status to marriage before the 31 July deadline.

and others condemned the attacks (see here, here, here).

HEALTH
The Ombudsperson established that a lesbian woman was

FOREIGN POLICY

discriminated against by her gynaecologist, who refused to

Slovenia joined the European Commission’s infringement

give her medically assisted reproduction care after an IVF

proceedings against Hungary over its anti-LGBT legislation.

treatment abroad. The doctor filed a conscientious objection
claim with Slovenia’s Medical Association, but the Association

FREEDOM OF ASSEMBLY

did not support the claim.

The nine-day Ljubljana Pride Festival kicked off on 9 June
and the Pride march was held on 17 June. This year’s motto

The interdisciplinary group on trans healthcare, set up by the

was ‘More Communities, One Goal’. The march gathered

Ministry of Health and the University Psychiatric Clinic Ljubljana

approximately 3500 people. The Minister of Labour, Family,

in 2020, met once this year. Communication with civil society

Social Affairs and Equal Opportunities joined the event and

improved this year.

also published a supportive statement. Minister for a Solidary
Future Simon Maljevac, the first openly gay minister, was also

In 2022, the National Institute of Public Health stated that they

present. For the first time, Slovenia’s President held a speech at

support the implementation of ICD-11, but no changes have

the march.

taken place since.

On the eve of Pride, a man threw a bottle and broke the window

Accessing medications became more difficult this year and this

of a bar that displayed a rainbow flag, and which is owned by a
prominent LGBTIQ+ rights activist. Several Pride participants
were attacked before, during and after the march (see here,
here, and here). Some were attacked with eggs while marching,
which was filmed and gathered countless hate comments
online, including death threats. Some counter-demonstrators

has impacted Nebido access as well - hormones need to be
picked up at GP’s practices, instead of simply at pharmacies.
One of the two endocrinologists working at the University
Clinic Centre in Ljubljana left, leading to longer delays for trans
persons initially accessing hormones in the country.

chanted anti-LGBT slogans, including “there are only two
genders”.

<

Index

>

LEGAL GENDER RECOGNITION
(See also under Bias-motivated Speech)
On the day of the Pride march on 17 June, 18 civil society
organisations held a press conference and launched an online
petition calling on the Minister of Interior to amend Article 37
of the Rulebook on the Enforcement of the Civil Registry Act
and delete the sentence that requires trans people to acquire a
certificate from a “medical professional” and proving that they
had “changed sex”. As of November, 2,700 people signed the
petition. With the removal of the passage, Slovenia would join
11 other European countries that provide LGR on the basis of
self-determination and in a simple administrative procedure.
The working group on LGR finalised its analysis of the legal
situation back in 2022, but the Ministry of Interior has stalled
the process since.
This year again, the Ombudsperson’s annual report called for
a reform to ensure legal gender recognition procedures are
based on self-determination.
In June, the Slovenian Democratic Youth (SDM) party launched
the ‘Two Sexes, One Truth’ campaign, opposing legal gender
recognition law reform and non-binary identities (see more
under Bias-motivated Speech).

POLICE AND LAW ENFORCEMENT
In July Legebitra, Parada ponosa, ŠKUC and the DIH met with
the General Deputy Director of the Police, who pledged to
introduce special police information points during the next
Pride parade, which will be positioned around Ljubljana and
Maribor and will enable LGBTIQ+ persons or anyone who has
been subjected to homophobic and/or transphobic violence,
to submit a report on the spot with appropriate professional
support. He also committed to reviewing existing training
curricula, to ensure police are educated on topics regarding
different minorities. It was agreed that it is necessary to
include LGBTIQ+ organisations and their knowledge in the
implementation of police training.

PUBLIC OPINION
Legebitra carried out a public opinion research on the
acceptance of rainbow families in Slovenia. The results showed
that there is 45% support for rainbow families in Slovenia, 36%
have a negative attitude towards rainbow families and 19% are
undecided.


SLOVENIA WEB PAGE
MORE INFORMATION ON WWW.ILGA-EUROPE.ORG

<

Index

>

