Transgender woman wins record payout in China after electroshock treatment | China | The Guardian Skip to main content Skip to navigation Close dialogue 1 / 1 Next image Previous image Toggle caption Print subscriptions Search jobs Sign in Eur Europe edition UK edition US edition Australia edition International edition The Guardian - Back to home The Guardian News Opinion Sport Culture Lifestyle Show more Hide expanded menu News View all News World news UK news Climate crisis Ukraine Environment Science Global development Football Tech Business Obituaries Opinion View all Opinion The Guardian view Columnists Cartoons Opinion videos Letters Sport View all Sport Football Cricket Rugby union Tennis Cycling F1 Golf US sports Culture View all Culture Books Music TV & radio Art & design Film Games Classical Stage Lifestyle View all Lifestyle Fashion Food Recipes Love & sex Health & fitness Home & garden Women Men Family Travel Money Search input google-search Search Support us Print subscriptions Search jobs Holidays Digital Archive Guardian Licensing Live events About Us The Guardian app Video Podcasts Pictures Newsletters Today's paper Inside the Guardian Guardian Weekly Crosswords Wordiply Corrections Tips Search input google-search Search Search jobs Holidays Digital Archive Guardian Licensing Live events About Us World Europe US news Americas Asia Australia Middle East Africa Inequality Global development Performance artist Ling'er, 28, said she hoped her case could help other LGBTQ+ people protect their rights. Photograph: Ling'er View image in fullscreen Performance artist Ling'er, 28, said she hoped her case could help other LGBTQ+ people protect their rights. Photograph: Ling'er China This article is more than 1 year old Transgender woman wins record payout in China after electroshock treatment This article is more than 1 year old Case marks first time a trans person has successfully challenged use of such conversion practices in country Amy Hawkins senior China correspondent Thu 21 Nov 2024 10.55 CET Last modified on Thu 21 Nov 2024 19.02 CET Share Prefer the Guardian on Google A transgender woman in China has won a record amount of compensation from a hospital that subjected her to several sessions of electroshock conversion practices without her consent. Changli county people’s court in Qinhuangdao, a city in Hebei, approved a 60,000 yuan (£6,552) award to Ling’er, a 28-year-old performance artist who was recorded male at birth but identifies as a woman. LGBTQ+ activists described the award, approved on 31 October, as a victory for trans rights in China. Ling’er, who uses a pseudonym, said she hoped her case, which is the first instance of a trans person winning a legal challenge against the use of electroshock conversion practices in China, could help others in the LGBTQ+ community navigate medical disputes and protect their rights. “In China, the situation for transgender people is not very optimistic,” she said. “There’s a lack of protection for this group.” Ling’er was admitted to Qinhuangdao City Fifth hospital in July 2022, having come out to her parents as transgender the previous year. Her parents were “very opposed” to her gender identity, Ling’er said, and “felt that I wasn’t mentally stable. So they sent me to a mental hospital.” In hospital, she was diagnosed with “anxiety disorder and discordant sexual orientation”, despite the fact that her supposed “disorder” related to her gender identity, not her sexual orientation (she identifies as heterosexual). She was kept there for 97 days and subjected to seven sessions of electroshocks. “It caused serious damage to my body,” Ling’er said. “Every time I underwent the treatment, I would faint … I didn’t agree to it, but I had no choice.” The hospital “tried to ‘correct me’, to make me conform to society’s expectations”. She said the electroshocks had caused ongoing heart problems which require medication. Ling’er filed a lawsuit against the hospital, which was heard by a court in August. She argued that her personal rights had been violated by the treatments. China’s mental health law says people cannot be forcibly subjected to psychiatric treatment unless they are a threat to the safety of themselves or others. Darius Longarino, a research scholar at Yale Law School who focuses on Chinese law and civil society, said doctors who administered medicines or used electroshock practices to “convert” gay or trans people were “using intrusive, harmful treatments in order to treat something that should not be diagnosed in the first place”. Ling’er’s doctor claimed in August that she might pose a risk to the safety of her parents if they killed themselves because of her gender identity, according to a report in Chinese media. There is little precedent for this kind of legal challenge. In 2017, a gay man in Henan province was awarded 5,000 yuan after he was forced to stay in a psychiatric hospital for 19 days and to take medicines to “treat” his homosexuality. Another ruling in 2014 ordered a clinic to pay a gay man 3,500 yuan, after he sued the institution for giving him hypnosis and using electroshocks to “cure” his homosexuality. The issue in that case, however, was not lack of consent but false advertising, because the judge ruled homosexuality was not an illness that could be “cured”. Conversion practices operate within a legal grey area in China. In 2001, China removed homosexuality from an official list of psychiatric disorders, but it retained a diagnosis for distress about one’s sexual orientation. This left the door open for psychiatrists to tout physical and psychiatric remedies to “cure” a person’s sexual orientation, or in Ling’er’s case, gender identity. Although the latest version of China’s medical guidelines have removed this particular diagnosis, enforcement and education in Chinese hospitals is patchy. One of the few doctors in China to work in transgender healthcare, who asked to remain anonymous because of the sensitivities of talking to foreign media, said part of the problem was a lack of awareness in the profession. When hospitals receive transgender patients, “they don’t know how to treat them. They think that using these methods [such as electroshocks] could help, but in fact they are wrong. They make this choice because of their lack of knowledge.” A study published in 2019, based on a survey of 385 people, found that nearly one in five transgender youths in China reported being forced into conversion practices by their parents. Qinhuangdao City Fifth hospital declined to comment. Additional research by Jason Tzu Kuan Lu Explore more on these topics China Transgender Asia Pacific news Share Reuse this content More on this story More on this story China reels from spate of suspected ‘revenge against society’ attacks 22 Nov 2024 India’s 1st Best Trans Model Agency review – rocky and emotional journey for acceptance 13 Nov 2024 ‘I find hope in sticking together and keeping each other warm’ – This is climate breakdown 22 Nov 2024 Georgian trans model murdered after parliament passes ‘anti-LGBTQ+’ law 19 Sept 2024 Transgender sprinter Valentina Petrillo fails to reach 400m final on Paralympic debut 2 Sept 2024 ‘Resurgence’ in China aid to Pacific amid tussle with US for influence 21 Nov 2024 Swedish police focus on Chinese ship after suspected undersea cable sabotage 20 Nov 2024 The good hacker: can Taiwanese activist turned politician Audrey Tang detoxify the internet? 17 Aug 2024 Valentina Petrillo to become first openly transgender athlete at Paralympics 13 Aug 2024 ‘Quite dodgy’: what kind of outfit does $80 buy at Temu and Shein? 20 Nov 2024 … … comments Most viewed Most viewed World Europe US news Americas Asia Australia Middle East Africa Inequality Global development News Opinion Sport Culture Lifestyle Original reporting and incisive analysis, direct from the Guardian every morning Sign up for our email About us Help Complaints & corrections Contact us Tip us off SecureDrop Privacy policy Cookie policy Tax strategy Terms & conditions All topics All writers Newsletters Digital newspaper archive Bluesky Facebook Instagram LinkedIn Threads TikTok YouTube Advertise with us Search UK jobs Tips Accessibility settings Work with us Back to top © 2026 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. (dcr)