Peru | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Peru At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? No Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? No Legal Gender Recognition Possible? No LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? No Last Update: March 12, 2026 Peru is one of the few countries in South America that does not legally recognize same-sex couples. Trans people can rectify the name and gender marker on their national identity card through the court, but the process is expensive, complicated, and can take many years . Since 2016, advocates for trans inclusion have been pushing for a law that allows this change to be made administratively, but these efforts have been blocked by conservative majorities in the legislature. Although Peru has a 2017 law explicitly banning discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity, violence and discrimination against LGBTIQ people persist , and cases of hate crimes often go unpunished . In April 2023, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights upheld a gay man’s rights to judicial protection and legal equality after he was subjected to discrimination by a private establishment. Public institutions also contribute to anti-LGBTIQ discrimination. In 2024, the Ministry of Health unexpectedly issued a decree classifying being transgender as a mental health disorder, a move that sparked widespread criticism from LGBTIQ activists and human rights organizations. In July 2025, following a legal challenge by activists, a constitutional court in Lima ruled that the decree was unconstitutional, recognizing its discriminatory nature. That ruling was later upheld unanimously, by a 5–0 vote, by the Supreme Court, bringing the case to a close. Peru has recently adopted laws threatening the rights of sexual and gender minorities. In April 2025, Peru enacted the “Law that Strengthens the Right to Sexual Integrity of Children and Adolescents,” restricting access to public restrooms based on biological sex. In November 2025, the legislature approved the “New Law of Equal Opportunities between Women and Men,” which removes the concept of gender from public policy and replaces it with a framework focused strictly on “equal opportunities between women and men based on biological sex.” This law also eliminates comprehensive sexuality education in schools, substituting it with a “scientific, biological, and ethical” model that critics warn will restrict access to age-appropriate, inclusive sexual health education. LGBTIQ activists and individuals continue to exercise fundamental rights and freedoms in public spaces, including the rights to freedom of association, expression, and assembly. Pride marches have been organized in Peru every year since 2002 , and the oldest Pride celebration on record in the country was in 1984. However, in April 2025, Congress passed a law requiring NGOs to report foreign funding and granting authorities broad discretion to revoke their registration based on ambiguous notions of “public order” or “security,” which may be weaponized against queer organizing. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International