Uruguay | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Uruguay At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Legal Gender Recognition Possible? Yes LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? Yes Same-Sex Relations Legal for Men throughout the Country? No Same-Sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? No Legal Gender Recognition Possible? No Bodily Autonomy of Intersex People Respected and Protected? No LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? No Last Update: March 12, 2026 Uruguay has a broad range of protections for the human rights of sexual and gender minorities and champions LGBTIQ equality at an international level. In 2013, same-sex marriage was legalized , and same-sex couples have been able to adopt since 2009. Uruguay has accessible legal gender recognition procedures . Since 2021, more than 120 trans people have accessed a reparation pension established by law for those who suffered institutional violence during the country’s civic-military dictatorship from 1973 to 1985. Antidiscrimination legislation explicitly covers sexual orientation and gender identity, and Uruguay’s hate crime laws include prejudice toward the victim’s real or perceived sexual orientation or gender identity among aggravating circumstances. Health professionals are prohibited from engaging in conversion practices or practices seeking to change a person’s sexual orientation and gender identity. Through the proclamation publicly read during the 2025 March for Diversity , LGBTIQ collectives called for the effective enforcement of the Comprehensive Law for Transgender Persons (in force since 2018), improved and decentralized mental health services with a diversity perspective, and the full guarantee of dignified, non-pathologizing legal name change procedures for trans children and adolescents. In 2024, Frente Amplio, the only political party that explicitly included LGBTIQ equality in its platform for elections, won the presidency and the Senate majority. While there are political actors engaging in anti-LGBTIQ rhetoric , the two largest parties are generally committed to diversity, inclusion, and gender equality. Uruguay’s National Action Plan on Women, Peace, and Security adopts an inclusive, intersectional approach to human security, recognizing the right of all individuals to “fully develop their human potential.” The plan emphasizes the importance of addressing compounded inequalities that heighten rights violations, including considerations of race, ethnicity, disability, gender identity, social class, and territoriality. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International