ENDING STRIP
SEARCHING
in Australian prisons

Acknowledgement of Country

Flat Out

The Human Rights Law Centre, Flat Out and FIGJAM
acknowledge Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
peoples as the custodians and First Peoples of so–called
Australia. We acknowledge the Traditional Owners of the
lands on which we work and live – including the lands of
the Wurundjeri, Bunurong, Gadigal, Ngunnawal, Darug
and Wadawurrung people – and pay our respect to Elders
of those lands, both past and present. We recognise that
this land always was and always will be Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander land because sovereignty has never
been ceded. We acknowledge the role of the colonial legal
and carceral systems in establishing and perpetuating the
oppression of First Nations peoples and that we have a
responsibility to work in solidarity with Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander peoples and organisations to undo
the injustices imposed on them since colonisation.

Flat Out is a Victoria–wide advocacy and support
service for women, trans and gender diverse people and
their children who have been criminalised. We are an
independent, not for profit, community–based organisation
that aims to prevent women and trans and gender–diverse
people from entering and returning to prison. Flat Out
resources women, trans and gender diverse people
with lived expertise to inform and educate the broader
community about the right to live free from trauma,
injustice and violence, and the issues they face within the
criminal legal system.

Authors
This report was co–authored by Sohini Mehta, Senior
Lawyer at Human Rights Law Centre, Monique Hurley,
Associate Legal Director at Human Rights Law Centre, and
Nina Storey, Family Violence Justice Project Coordinator at
Flat Out and FIGJAM member.
This report honours the contributions of formerly
incarcerated people and members of FIGJAM. We also wish
to express our particular thanks to Aunty Vickie Roach
and for the assistance provided by Karen Fletcher, Maggie
Munn, Georgia Smith and Josephine Langbien in the
preparation of this report.

Formerly Incarcerated Girls Justice
Advocates Melbourne (FIGJAM)
FIGJAM is a collective of formerly incarcerated women,
trans and gender diverse people based in Melbourne who
have survived violence in the community but also at the
hands of the state (namely prisons and police). FIGJAM was
founded by Family Violence Justice Project Co–Ordinator
from Flat Out – Nina – in the hope and dream of building
a community of staunch advocates providing connection,
support and stability to its members. FIGJAM use their
voices and experiences to change community attitudes and
push through barriers of stigma and discrimination. They
are invited regularly to consult, sit on focus groups, present
at conferences, engage with and attend community events,
influence policy reform, write submissions and reports and
participate in creative arts activities, podcasts and research.

Human Rights Law Centre
The Human Rights Law Centre uses strategic legal action,
policy solutions and advocacy to support people and
communities to eliminate inequality and injustice and
build a fairer, more compassionate Australia. We work
in coalition with key partners, including community
organisations, law firms and barristers, academics and
experts, and international and domestic human rights
organisations.

CONTENT NOTES
This report refers to and includes the experiences
of people subjected to strip searches in prison and
discusses the (re–)traumatising impact of this practice on
people with lived experience of violence.
Because of the secrecy that surrounds prisons and
ethical considerations around publishing photographs
of strip searching, this report uses illustrations to
depict the practice of strip searching and its deeply
harmful impacts. This is not intended to trivialise strip
searches; we acknowledge that neither illustrations nor
photographs can fully convey the experience of being
strip searched and the trauma caused by this practice.
This report does not intend to provide legal advice and
should not be relied upon as such.
March 2026
Cover illustration and throughout: Judy Kuo

CONTENTS
Foreword

4

Executive Summary

5

Key Findings

6

Recommendations

8

Background

10

Methodology

11

What is a Strip Search?

12

5 Reasons Why Strip Searching Must Be Abolished

14

   1. Strip searching is unnecessary and ineffective

15

   2. Strip searching is state–perpetrated violence

18

   3. Strip searching traumatises over–incarcerated communities

22

   4. Strip searching practices breach human rights standards

27

   5. There are less invasive alternatives to strip searching

34

Conclusion: Support people and communities, not prisons

37

Ending strip searching in Australian prisons

1

FOREWORD
Strip searches
in prisons must end.
Aunty Vickie Roach –
strong, proud Yuin woman

Credit: Jonny Weeks / Guardian / eyevine
2

As a strong, proud Yuin woman who
was subjected to strip searches while
caged in custody, I can tell you that
it is state–sanctioned sexual assault.
It is akin to being ambushed, raped
and forced to strip naked in front
of screws dressed in deliberately
authoritarian, intimidating uniforms.
I am a survivor of the Stolen Generations, and from personal
experience I can tell you that strip searching is an extension
of the sexual abuse I was subjected to as a child. When you
have been subjected time and time again to this kind of
treatment in a kids’ home, you figure out pretty quickly that
your own body doesn’t belong to you, it belongs to them.
And they can do what they like to you.
I am also a survivor of family violence, and I can tell you
that strip searching replicates the dehumanising dynamics
of abusive relationships. It only serves to degrade,
humiliate and allow others to assert control over our naked
and vulnerable bodies.
For most if not all women in prison, being strip searched
in itself will trigger extreme, lifelong trauma. The
imbalance of power between the screw and you makes the
practice ripe for abuse – they’ve seen your birthmarks, the
imperfections in your body, and they will make derogatory
and belittling comments in front of other screws and people
detained in the prison.
It is an intimidatory tool – you are naked in front of two
fully uniformed screws complete with defensive apparatus.
You hear many stories of women opting for non–contact,
box visits over contact visits with their family, their lawyers
and others to avoid the trauma of being stripped naked.
There is no evidence–base for strip searches. The data is
clear that strip searches rarely find anything as a result
of subjecting people to the process. All strip searches are
doing is traumatising people, particularly women.
The data is also unlikely to paint the full picture, with
records not always kept when people are subjected to
strip searches. In most places, we do not know how many
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people are being
subjected to strip searches because those records are
simply not kept.

Ending strip searching in Australian prisons

It is unnecessary to strip search people in prison, and it is
ridiculous that it is still occurring today when we have had
the technology for decades to maintain ‘security’ in prisons
without resorting to strip searching. There are less invasive
and less traumatising ways of preventing contraband
entering prisons. But strip searching continues because the
screws simply want to retain the control that this practice
allows them to have over us. They relish having power over
you, and the control that power permits.
Pathways to make complaints about prison practices are
limited and obstructed. Nobody is properly overseeing
these powers, and nobody is watching the watchers to make
sure that people’s human rights are not being abused behind
bars. Attempts to complain often result in targeted reprisals.
Sometimes this is meted out in the form of being subjected
to extra strip searching – how ironic. Sometimes this is
meted out by unnecessary cell searches, often with prison
dogs. Other times by being subjected to excessive urine
testing in a small room with two or more uniformed screws
crowded up against you. All of which are other tools of
power and control.
Prisons are brutal, dehumanising places. While many
people think that prisons make us safer, they do not. In
fact, they make everyone less safe – inside and out. The
trauma, abuse and aggression that is an everyday part of
prison life undermines any attempt to rehabilitate and
causes resentment. Prisons do not break cycles of abuse,
they perpetuate them.
We need to be helping people to heal, not harming them
further by subjecting them to demeaning practices such
as strip searching. There must be more focus on what the
alternatives to prison could be. The entire system is rotten
to the core, from the top down, from the policy makers to
the policy enforcers. The entire incarceration system needs
to be dismantled.
I have always fiercely advocated for people in prison,
that they are deserving of dignity, and that their human
rights must be respected. For us to be called human, we
must respect everyone’s human rights. I have told my
story far and wide – I have told the prisons, I have told
the government, I have told the media and I have told the
Yoorrook Justice Commission.
Now I am telling you. And you need to listen.
Aunty Vickie Roach – strong, proud Yuin woman

3

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
This report calls for all governments to ban
the use of strip searches in prisons in law.

Every day, people in
prisons across Australia
are subjected to strip
searching, despite the
existence of less invasive
search alternatives.
Strip searching is an unnecessary, degrading and deeply
harmful practice that must end. It involves a person
literally being stripped of their dignity – being forced to
remove their clothing for their bodies to be inspected by
prison guards, and often also being forced to submit to
humiliating requests like bending, squatting and spreading
their legs. Often people’s first experience in prison will be a
strip search. In many prisons, people are subjected to strip
searches repeatedly and routinely.
In most jurisdictions, children as young as ten can be forced
to remove their clothing in front of adult prison guards.
They will be ushered into a room with two adult prison
guards and ordered to remove their clothing. Their genitals
will be exposed. Their underwear will be inspected. Their
chests will be laid bare.

4

In this report, formerly incarcerated women, trans and
gender diverse people share their experiences of being
subjected to strip searches in Australian prisons – a practice
long condemned by lived experience advocates.
Strip searching is a practice that would be criminal if
imposed on the wider community – for decades, people
with lived experience of incarceration have been calling
it out for what it is: sexual violence at the hands of the
state.1 Yet, as a result of the dehumanisation of people in
prison, it is authorised by law in prisons across the country.
Governments across Australia purport to justify the practice
of strip searching as necessary to prevent contraband
from entering prisons and to ensure the ‘security and good
order’ of prisons. Data and a mounting body of evidence
demonstrates, however, that strip searching does not
serve either of these ends. The practice is unnecessary,
ineffective and rarely identifies items, let alone dangerous
items, of contraband. It does not have a deterrent effect,
nor does reducing strip searching lead to an increase in
contraband in prisons.
While strip searching fails to achieve its purported
purposes, it continues to be wielded by prison authorities
as a tool of punishment and coercive control, unchecked by
proper oversight. Abuse thrives behind bars and horrifying
accounts of perpetrators exploiting strip search practices
to sexually abuse children in youth prisons have been
revealed.

Strip searching is re-traumatising for the high numbers of
people in prison – particularly women and children – who
are victim-survivors of family and sexual violence. It is a
gendered tactic of state violence that draws on patriarchal
logics of control, domination and sexual humiliation.
For Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples
in prison, the horrific harms of strip searching are
compounded by their mass incarceration and the already
discriminatory treatment they are at risk of being subjected
to in prison. For trans and gender diverse people, strip
searching is excessively harmful in a prison system that is
completely unable to meet their needs.
International human rights standards are clear that
strip searching should be undertaken only if ‘absolutely
necessary’. This report makes the case that strip searches
are not necessary, with less invasive search alternatives
available. Everyone deserves to be treated with dignity,
and there is no reason for governments to subject people in
prison to a practice that can scar them for life when prison
authorities can use safer, less intrusive and more effective
alternatives, like scanners similar to those used at airports
and public buildings across the country.

Ending strip searching in Australian prisons

This report is being published at a time when the number
of people being pipelined into prisons across the country
is skyrocketing due to discriminatory and turbo–charged
‘tough on crime’ politics, and strip searches represent
only one cruel carceral tool of many that undermines any
rehabilitative purpose that prisons purport to serve.
Alongside ending the strip searching of people in prisons,
governments must work to end the country’s mass
imprisonment crisis. Instead of expanding the criminal
punishment system and subjecting more people to
brutal practices like strip searches, all state and territory
governments must build up the community supports
required to divert people away from prisons.

5

KEY FINDINGS
zero
contraband found

is no evidence of any relationship between
in prison experience strip searches as
1. There
strip searching and contraband detection.
2. People
acts of sexual assault and coercive control.
Data covering varying periods in 2021–2022 shows that, in
some cases, zero items are identified despite hundreds of
strip searches. For example, in Victoria in the month of
April 2022, 221 recorded strip searches were conducted on
women at the Dame Phyllis Frost Centre with zero items
found. Similarly, in Tasmania over three months during
2022, women in prison were subjected to at least 817 strip
searches with no items recorded as being found.

For decades, lived experience advocates have asserted that
strip searches are state–perpetrated sexual violence. The
testimonies of formerly incarcerated women, trans and
gender diverse people as set out in this report confirm how
deeply traumatising strip searches are, particularly for the
many people locked away in prison who are victim survivors
of sexual violence, family violence and child abuse.

3.

4.

The ends do not justify the means: strip
searches are conducted routinely but rarely
uncover dangerous items.

Based on data covering varying periods in 2021-2022,
it is estimated that, on average, adults in prison across
six Australian jurisdictions were subjected to more than
15,000 strip searches each month, with strip searches most
commonly conducted for routine reasons. Rarely any items
found were dangerous, with items including stationery,
personal care products, jewellery, food and basic clothing.

6

Less invasive alternatives expose strip
searching as unnecessary.

A number of body scanners are already available in prisons
across Australia and have reduced unnecessary prison strip
searches. For example, in South Australia, following the
installation of scanners at Kurlana Tapa youth prison, the
practice of strip searching children has reportedly ceased.
Recent reporting on the introduction of body scanning
technology in Australian Capital Territory (ACT) adult
prisons also indicates that this has significantly reduced the
rate at which people are being subjected to strip searches.

I was last incarcerated decades ago. Now, years later,
I support other formerly incarcerated women, and it’s
devastating that the prison system continues to inflict
the violence of strip searching. Even talking about
the practice brings up things you have buried – strip
searching is not something you get over.
– Stacey Nolan, FIGJAM

in prison are routinely having their
5. People
human rights breached by strip searches.

are being forced to strip in front of
6. Children
adult prison guards.

International human rights standards are clear that adults
should only be subjected to strip searches when ‘absolutely
necessary’. The availability of less invasive alternatives
means that it should never be ‘absolutely necessary’
to subject people in prisons to the cruel and degrading
practice. The ongoing use of strip searches calls into
question prison authorities’ compliance with international
human rights standards.

In most Australian jurisdictions, children as young as ten are
incarcerated and can be subjected to strip searching. Based
on data covering varying periods in 2021-2022, it is estimated
that, on average, children were subjected to more than 300
strip searches each month in prisons across seven Australian
jurisdictions. In the month of April 2022 alone, 127 strip
searches were conducted on children at two New South Wales
(NSW) youth prisons. Only three searches identified items.

7.

8.

The harms of strip searching compound the
mass incarceration of Aboriginal and Torres
Strait Islander peoples.

Although disaggregated data is limited, in the ACT,
Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander adults were
disproportionately subjected to strip searches, with
Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander women reportedly
subjected to nearly half of all strip searches of women in
2024. Similarly, in Queensland, over a seven-month period
during 2020-2021, over half of the nearly 700 recorded
strip searches at three youth prisons were conducted on
Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander children.

Ending strip searching in Australian prisons

There is a crisis of secrecy in prisons.

Prison authorities are not transparently recording the
number of strip searches, or the reasons for them,
increasing the risk of abuse thriving behind bars. In
Western Australia, recent data requests were denied on the
basis that no central register of prison strip searches exists.
In most other jurisdictions, strip search records that were
maintained were often challenging to interpret because of
incomplete and/or unclear recordkeeping.

7

RECOMMENDATIONS
Ban strip
searching

8

1.

Ban strip searching

3.

Improve access to justice for people
in prison

All state and territory governments must ban
strip searches in prisons by law.

All state and territory governments must:

2.

Regulate alternatives to strip
searching

4.

Independently monitor prisons

5.

Support people and communities, not
prisons

a. Establish accessible and legally enforceable
Human Rights Acts incorporating Australia’s
international human rights commitments.
In the ACT, Victoria and Queensland,
where human rights laws have already been
enacted, these laws must be strengthened to
provide effective remedy for people seeking
accountability for mistreatment in prison and
harm caused by mistreatment.
b.Establish and adequately resource
independent legal and advocacy services
for people in prison, including existing
Aboriginal Legal Services for Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander peoples in prison, to
reduce impunity for mistreatment in prison.
c. Enact law reform to mandate the recording of
searches of people in prison; the reasons for
searches; results of searches, including any
items identified; the age, gender, race and/or
ethnicity of the person subjected to searches;
who conducted the searches and the prison
at which they took place. This information
should be published quarterly, at minimum,
while protecting the identities of those
subjected to searches.

Ending strip searching in Australian prisons

With strip searches banned, all state and
territory governments must enact law reform
to prescribe that the use of scanners and other
alternative search methods only ever be used
as a last resort in cases of absolute necessity,
after less intrusive alternatives have already
been exhausted and there remain objectively
reasonable grounds to believe that a person
is carrying specified, dangerous contraband.
The use of any alternative search method
or scanning technology should be subject to
individual risk assessment and relevant human
rights considerations.

To monitor and prevent the mistreatment of
people in prison, all Australian governments
must urgently implement Australia’s overdue
obligations pursuant to the United Nations’
anti–torture protocol, the Optional Protocol
to the Convention Against Torture, including
by establishing and adequately resourcing
independent bodies to conduct regular and
unannounced inspections of all places of
detention, including prisons.

Rather than opening new and expanding
current prisons, all state and territory
governments must address the country’s
mass imprisonment crisis and build up the
community supports required to divert people
away from prisons.

9

BACKGROUND
This report follows Total Control:
Ending the routine strip searching
of women in Victoria’s prisons (Total
Control report),2 a report published
by the Human Rights Law Centre in
December 2017.
The Total Control report documented the excessive use of
routine strip searches on women in Victoria’s prisons and
the harm caused. It advocated for an end to the routine
strip searching of women incarcerated in Victoria, not least
because of the availability of alternatives to strip searching
such as body scanners.
Some two years after the publication of the Total Control
report, in January 2020, the Victorian Government
confirmed that one maximum security women’s prison had
been trialling body scanner technology and saliva drug
testing over the previous 18 months, resulting in 20,000
less strip searches over that period.3
The subsequent report of the Cultural Review of the Adult
Custodial Corrections System in Victoria found, however,
that strip searching continued to be performed routinely
across Victoria’s prisons.4 This trend has been confirmed
by data collected by the Human Rights Law Centre via
freedom of information requests made since the Total
Control report was published.

Corrections Victoria have reported that prison guards
were initially reluctant to reduce the number of searches
or adopt alternative technologies, because to do so
would involve accepting that a practice they had inflicted
“hundreds or thousands of times throughout their whole
career, was in effect unnecessary”.5
This evidence highlights the entrenched, arbitrary use
of strip searching by prison guards on people in prison,
confirming what people with experience of incarceration
already know: prisons are sites of violent punishment
and trauma, not rehabilitation.
The harmful effects of strip searching are exacerbated
by Australia’s mass incarceration crisis. Over the decade
to 2024, Australia’s prison population has skyrocketed in
both number and proportion of the population,6 despite the
rate of crime falling.7 Escalating imprisonment rates and
over–crowding create a toxic culture, increasing the risk of
people in prisons being subjected to violence and human
rights abuses.8
In this context, any power to strip search people in prison
is ripe for further abuses of power, and any reform short of
a legislative prohibition on strip searching is insufficient.

Strip searching in other places of detention
While this report focuses on strip searching in
Australian prisons, the practice is also deployed
by governments and their agents on people locked
away in other places of detention, with similarly
harmful impacts.

Prisons aren’t the only places where
people are detained – all places of
detention including but not limited
to police cells and immigration
detention centres are part of the
prison industrial complex where
strip searches should be abolished.
– Nina, FIGJAM

10

I was strip searched when I was
haemorrhaging in a police cell.
Instead of receiving the urgent
medical attention I needed, I was
subjected to more harm and indignity.
– Stacey Nolan, FIGJAM
For example, in NSW, a recent report by Redfern
Legal Centre found that, in the seven years
between July 2016 and June 2023, 1,546 children
were subjected to strip searches by NSW Police,
nearly half (44.57%) of whom were First Nations
children.9
People in immigration detention can also be
subjected to strip searching. Laws passed in
December 2024 drastically expanded the basis
for strip searches in immigration detention, now
allowing strip searches where an officer suspects
a person in detention has a “prohibited item” in
their possession.10

METHODOLOGY
This report is based on:

•
•
•

Contributions from formerly incarcerated people
and members of the FIGJAM collective of formerly
incarcerated women, trans and gender diverse people.
Where people opted not to remain anonymous, their
contributions are attributed.

The Human Rights Law Centre made requests for
information in two phases. The first, building on the 2017
Total Control report, sought:
• updated data on strip searches in women’s prisons in
Victoria and data on strip searches in women’s prisons in
other Australian jurisdictions; and

A literature review, focusing on the use of strip
searching in prisons in Australia.

• data on strip searches in youth prisons in Australian
jurisdictions.

Information obtained via a series of freedom of
information requests made by the Human Rights Law
Centre to the agencies responsible for the operation of
adult and youth prisons in each Australian state and
territory (see Supplementary Paper).

The data obtained in this first phase generally indicated that
people in prison were subjected to excessive strip searching,
mostly as a matter of routine or blanket practice, rather
than based on any reasonable suspicion that a person was
concealing contraband. Only a fraction of strip searches
identified dangerous contraband.
As the initial data covered varying time periods and
focused only on women’s and youth prisons, the Human
Rights Law Centre conducted a second phase of requests to
obtain information on strip searches across prisons in all
Australian jurisdictions over a consistent time frame.

Phase two information requests
For the seven–month period between 1 October
2021 and 30 April 2022, the following information
was sought for youth, women’s and men’s prisons
in all Australian jurisdictions:
• the number of strip searches conducted;
• the reasons for the searches;
• the number of items of contraband found as a
result of the searches;

The data obtained in this second phase tended to confirm
that people in prison continue to be subjected to excessive
rates of ‘routine’ strip searching, with only a fraction of
strip searches identifying dangerous contraband.
During both phases, the Human Rights Law Centre
experienced significant challenges in obtaining this
information. In some jurisdictions, they were unable to
obtain any of the information sought. In other jurisdictions,
they had to negotiate and narrow the scope of requests
after facing significant resistance from agencies on the
basis that collating the relevant records would amount to an
‘unreasonable diversion of resources.’

• the nature of those items;
• the gender of the people subjected to the searches
and whether they were Aboriginal and/or Torres
Strait Islander;
• whether the people subjected to the searches
were children or adults; and
• the prison where each search took place.

Given issues with prison guards recording
strip searches accurately – or sometimes
not at all – it’s notable that the data—which,
to me, represents the best–case scenario
and likely omits many strip searches that
have taken place—still confirms that strip
searches are excessive and ineffective
– Stacey Stokes, FIGJAM

Further limitations of the data obtained – including the risk
of poor, incomplete or false recording of strip searches by
prison guards – are detailed in the Supplementary Paper.

Ending strip searching in Australian prisons

11

What is a
strip search?
You have to hold your breasts up, and bend
and part so guards can see right up you – even
when you’re on your period. It’s disgusting.
You never feel the same afterward, and you
can never look at the guards who searched
you the same way again.
– Jana, FIGJAM

12

Strip searches in prison involve a person being
forced to remove their clothing for inspection
by prison guards. Children are made to strip for
inspection by adult prison guards in youth prisons.

The procedures for strip searches in prisons are detailed
in policies which vary across Australian jurisdictions, and
sometimes across different prisons. In many Australian
prisons, people are subjected to strip searches repeatedly
and routinely.
While prison authorities tend not to use the term ‘strip
search’, instead referring to ‘removal of clothing search’,
‘partially clothed body search’ or ‘unclothed search’, these
sanitised terms obscure the reality of people in prison
being forced to bare and contort their bodies for inspection
by prison guards.

It’s not just undressing; it’s bending over
and squatting — it’s humiliating.
– Sara, FIGJAM
They’re sexually abusing us by strip
searching us – making us do all sorts
of poses. It’s really degrading and
humiliating.
– Zoe, FIGJAM
To illustrate what a strip search may involve, the September
2025 policy governing strip searches in adult prisons in
Queensland provides for strip searches to be performed
by at least two prison guards.11 During the strip search,
the guards can require the partially naked person to hold
their arms in the air, spread their legs and bend forward.
The guards can also require the person to run their fingers
through their hair; to submit to inspection of their mouth
and ears; and to raise each foot and wiggle their toes. If
the person subjected to the strip search is menstruating or
breastfeeding, they are required to remove and dispose of
their sanitary pad or breast pads, provided that new pads
are available at the location where the search takes place.
In certain circumstances, if a person refuses to be subjected
to a strip search, prison guards can secure approval to use
force on them.12

Ending strip searching in Australian prisons

Despite the degrading nature of strip searching, in many
jurisdictions the practice is authorised by law in a wide
range of circumstances, including for the “security or good
order of the prison or prisoners”.13

They talk about the safety of people in
prison, but strip searches destroy that.
We’re treated without trust or dignity, and
when we’re released, we carry that damage
with us, expecting the world to judge and
mistreat us the same way.
– Mon, FIGJAM
Even though prison guards often have state–sanctioned
authority to make people in prison perform humiliating
and degrading actions like bending, spreading and
wiggling while partially naked, people in prison are at
risk of being subjected to other, humiliating practices
during strip searches which exceed even this broad
authority. For example, in 2023, the Queensland Human
Rights Commission documented evidence of women in
prison being stripped entirely naked, asked to squat and
“walk like a crab”; “lift [their] fat up”; “put [their] legs up
and cough”; “spread [their] cheeks”; and “jump around in
a circle”.14

One guard lewdly said to me during a strip
search, “Bend and part, but do it slowly.”
Another time I was strip searched, a guard
farted before leaving me naked in the room.
The guards laughed hysterically at that.
– Stacey Stokes, FIGJAM

13

5 reasons why
strip searching
must be abolished

14

1.
Strip searching is
unnecessary and ineffective
Governments across Australia justify strip searches as
necessary to prevent contraband from entering prisons
and to ensure the safety of people in prison.15 Strip
searches, however, rarely pick up any items – let alone
dangerous contraband.

Contraband – items that are controlled or banned
from entering a prison – can include items as minor as
tobacco, chewing gum and movies above M rating.16

Even food taken from a community
workspace or kitchen is considered
contraband.
– Nikki, FIGJAM
People in prison are denied the autonomy and
dignity to manage their own medication and
treatment needs. Even basic medications like
Panadol, or essential gender affirming treatment
such as hormone replacement therapy (HRT), can be
treated as contraband in prison.

While incarcerated in a medium
security prison in Victoria, my HRT
was considered contraband because
it contained a tiny amount of alcohol.
As a result, I was only able to use it
under supervision by a guard who
watched me rub it into my inner thigh.
– Stacey Stokes, FIGJAM

In a 2019 review, the Western Australian Office of the
Inspector of Custodial Services found no evidence of any
relationship between strip search frequency and rates of
drug detection.17 Data collected over five years from 2014
to 2019 revealed that out of nearly 900,000 recorded strip
searches in Western Australian prisons, only one in 1,500
strip searches identified contraband (0.06%), with most
of the items recovered not drugs– or weapons–related.18

Ending strip searching in Australian prisons

The lack of relationship between strip searching and
contraband detection is confirmed by the latest data obtained
by the Human Rights Law Centre, which shows that, in
several jurisdictions, strip searching found zero items.

percent
zero
contraband found

zero
contraband found

zero
contraband found

In Tasmania, in the three–month
period between February 2022
and April 2022, 817 recorded strip
searches were conducted at Mary
Hutchinson women’s prison and
Risdon men’s prison. 90 of these strip
searches did not record whether any
items were found. Of the remaining
727 strip searches, zero items were
identified.
In Victoria, in the month of April
2022, 221 recorded strip searches
were conducted at Dame Phyllis Frost
Centre, Victoria’s maximum security
women’s prison, with zero items
found.
In the ACT, in the seven–month
period between October 2021 and
April 2022, there were seven recorded
strip searches at Bimberi youth
prison. Zero items were identified.

More recently, the Queensland Human Rights
Commission’s 2023 review of strip searches of women in
Queensland prisons (QHRC Review) revealed “an absurdly
low rate of contraband detection” for strip searches and
concluded that strip searches are ineffective at improving
prison safety.19
In the fraction of strip searches where items are
identified, they rarely constitute dangerous contraband.

15

Data obtained by the Human Rights Law Centre shows that some of the items found in strip searches in
Australian prisons included a ping pong ball; a book; stationery including pens, coloured pencils, markers
and a post it note; beauty and hygiene products including roller deodorant, soap, lip gloss and hair extensions;
jewellery; food including chocolate and clothing including underwear and t–shirts.

Potentially dangerous contraband can be detected by less
intrusive alternatives, such as body scanners, eliminating
the need for strip searches: see Section 5: There are less
invasive alternatives to strip searching below.
The ineffectiveness of strip searching is compounded by
an often blanket approach based on routine, rather than
absolute necessity. In many jurisdictions, people in prison
may be strip searched when they first enter prison; each
time they attend court, a medical appointment or visit with
family; and when they are transferred between prisons.
Alarmingly, the most recent data obtained by the Human
Rights Law Centre indicates that strip searches on adults
in Australian prisons were most commonly conducted for
routine reasons.

percent
In the ACT, in the seven–month period between
October 2021 and April 2022, the most common
reason recorded for strip searches conducted on
adults imprisoned at the ACT’s adult prison was court
attendance, accounting for 564, or 47.32%, of 1,192
strip searches of adults during this period. Under
a policy that came into effect on 11 February 2022,
people in ACT prisons should not be strip searched
routinely on the way to and from court.20
In Queensland, in the three–month period between
February 2022 and April 2022, the most common reason
recorded for strip searches in adult prisons was escorts
and transfers, accounting for 8,530, or 57.86%, of
14,741 strip searches of adults during this period.
In South Australia, in the three-month period
between February 2022 and April 2022, the most
common reason recorded for the 5,741 strip searches
conducted on men were movements within, to or
from prison (1,727 strip searches, or 44.26%, of
strip searches of men during this period).
In Tasmania, in the three–month period from
February 2022 to April 2022, the most common
reasons recorded for strip searches conducted on
adults at Mary Hutchinson and Risdon prisons
related to initial reception into the prison, people
entering or leaving the prison and “general safety”,
accounting for 725, or 88.74%, of 817 strip searches
of adults during this period.

16

The Human Rights Law Centre was unable to obtain
sufficient information in relation to the recorded reasons
for strip searches conducted in adult prisons in the
Northern Territory, Victoria, Western Australia and NSW
between 2021-22.
Similarly, in youth prisons in NSW, Queensland and
Tasmania, strip searches of children were most commonly
conducted routinely, upon admission to prison, over
varying periods in 2021-2022.21
In some jurisdictions, routine strip searching is mandated
by law and policy. For example, in NSW, prison policy
mandates routine strip searching on arrival to the prison,
including from secure custody at another prison; and after
a contact visit.22 The routine strip searching of people
in prison when they are in secure custody is particularly
arbitrary. For example, a 2020 inspection of NSW Mary
Wade Correctional Centre found that women were routinely
strip searched after contact visits and even after non–
contact visits, despite no contraband being found after a
visit over a year, leading to recommendations to end the
practice.23
In South Australia, data obtained by the Human Rights Law
Centre indicates that, in the seven–month period between
October 2020 and April 2021, some of the 1,476 recorded
strip searches of women at the Adelaide Women’s Prison
and Adelaide Pre–release Centre were conducted after non–
contact visits undertaken via an iPad, with no items found.

Even when strip searches are said to be based on
reasonable suspicion, they often rely on arbitrary
judgments made by prison guards or policies which
allow for random strip searching.

Guards can access our criminal records
and are undoubtedly Googling us. I felt like
guards targeted me for strip searching
because of my offending history.
– Sara, FIGJAM
They say strip searches are based on
‘reasonable suspicion,’ but inside they
often happen on the whim of a screw* or
because of some stupid blanket policy.
When one new girl moved into our unit, all
seven of us were strip searched for urines
regularly. One being an elderly lady who
had never touched drugs in her life. How is
that reasonable?
– Mon, FIGJAM
*Screw: prison guard.

Guards never strip searched me in prison.
I was in for drugs charges and I think they
stereotyped me as an idiot party girl, not
a criminal. This just shows the arbitrary
approach taken by guards.
– Georgia Sheales, FIGJAM
Strip searching – routine or otherwise – cannot be justified
by reference to any deterrent effect. Not only is there
no data to indicate that strip searching deters the entry
of contraband into prisons, reduced strip searching has
not led to any increase in contraband entering prisons.24
For example, in the United Kingdom, following the 2007
Corston Report recommending the replacement of drug–
related strip searches with a pilot of ion scan machines
in women’s prisons,25 the ensuing 18–month pilot across
five prisons did not result in any increase in contraband
entering the prisons.26

Ending strip searching in Australian prisons

17

2.
Strip searching is
state–perpetrated violence
As a result of sustained advocacy in past decades,27 there
has been increasing recognition of strip searching as
sexual abuse, with currently and formerly incarcerated
women highlighting that abuse behind prison walls mimics
violence by their partners and others.28 Women reported
to the QHRC Review that being strip searched was akin to
“being raped”,29 or “officially abused”.30
Outside prison walls, if prison guards forced people to strip
and submit to inspections of their bodies, these actions
would be recognised as sexual crimes.31 Yet, governments
authorise and normalise the strip searching of people in
prison, “the majority of whom are poor, racialised, and/or
indigenous, [who] are relegated to a class of subhumanness
for which humane treatment is not required”.32

In Victoria, because of harsh bail laws,
record numbers of people are being
locked away before even being tried for an
offence. For some of them, it will be their
first experience in custody. Strip searching
is one of the first things the system does to
show you that you’re less than human, that
you’re disposable.
The first time I was incarcerated, I was
escorted to a room which was dark and
cold. I was told to undress. I am a survivor
of violence, including sexual assault. I felt
violated and abused and began to sob.
I was told to remove all my jewellery
including the beads and jewels from my
hair, which was in dreadlocks. I did not
speak, removed what I could and handed it
to the officers.
I was told that I must remove all foreign
matter from my hair, to which I replied I
couldn’t. The officers left and returned with
scissors. They cut my hair and told me to
get dressed.
– Nina, FIGJAM

18

Strip searching is not only endorsed by governments, but
perpetrated by prison guards as government agents.33
While prison authorities increasingly co–opt trauma–
informed discourse to legitimise prisons as therapeutic
spaces that address individual trauma and obscure their
role as perpetrators of structural violence,34 the ongoing
use of strip searching in prisons confirms that “prison is
not and cannot be a therapeutic community, as prisons are
built on an ethos of power, surveillance and control, yet
trauma sufferers require safety in order to begin healing.”35

They say they’re trauma–informed but
they’re actually re–traumatising us.
– Sara, FIGJAM
Being forced to be half–naked—rather
than fully naked—during a search and
being given some privacy to get dressed
afterward doesn’t make strip searching
trauma–informed.
– Georgia Sheales, FIGJAM
Prisons are violent, they confuse
community by using trauma care
language to hide harmful practices,
referring to solitary confinement in wet
cells as “safe cells”.
– Nina, FIGJAM
Despite efforts intended to curb the excessive use of
strip searching in prisons, the practice has persisted. In
the ACT, for instance, after a 2007 audit highlighted the
degrading nature of strip searches,36 strip search laws
were amended to provide that the practice may only
be conducted where the Director–General reasonably
suspects a person is concealing a ‘seizeable item’, or
reasonably believes they may have obtained one while
unsupervised, and less invasive searches are unavailable or
ineffective.37 A subsequent audit in 2014 found that, while
this significantly reduced routine strip searches of women
around contact visits, routine searches on admission to
prison were still “generally occurring”.38 Strip search laws
were subsequently amended39 in 2023 to allow people to
be strip searched upon admission without individualised
risk assessment, a change the ACT Inspector of Custodial
Services has noted is unnecessary given the introduction of
x-ray body scanners.40
Ending strip searching in Australian prisons

Similarly, in Victoria, the December 2022 report of the
cultural review of the adult prisons system could not find
that a 2017 recommendation by the Victorian Ombudsman
to immediately cease the practice of strip searching all
women before and after contact visits and after external
appointments, and consequent policy updates, had been
operationalised.41
The entrenched, improper use of strip searching in
prisons reveals its actual function. While strip searching
does nothing to detect contraband, it is deployed as
a very powerful tool of coercive control – a form of
violence comprising a pattern of behaviours designed to
intimidate, isolate and control people.
The use of strip searching by prison guards to assert power
and control was confirmed by Victoria’s Independent
Broad–based Anti–corruption Commission in its 2021
Special report on corrections, which reported that the
General Manager of Port Phillip Prison said that strip
searches were “one of the options available to assert
control” over people in prison, despite official policy
stipulating that the practice is not to be used to punish
or control.42 Similarly, the Western Australian Office
of the Inspector of Custodial Services found that 15%
of guards reported that they had seen strip searching
used to modify behaviour.43 In the Northern Territory,
the Ombudsman found some people detained in Darwin
prison were subjected to strip searches during periods of
separation when they had not left their cell, calling it “a
display of oppressive power in an already highly controlled
environment”.44 Women in Queensland prisons likewise
described strip searches as an additional punishment used
to control and demean them, leading to a loss of bodily
autonomy and a sense of being ‘owned’ by the system.45

Once a screw has seen you naked, with all
your most intimate parts laid bare, there’s
an undeniable sense of power they hold
over your shame. You can feel it in the way
they look at you in the yard or when they
pass you on the count — a quiet assertion
of control.
– Mon, FIGJAM
The practice of strip searching grooms
us to accept the violation of our bodies as
normal and standard procedure, putting us
at further risk of being sexually assaulted.
– Nina, FIGJAM
19

Prison is the punishment, and is supposed to be a place
of rehabilitation, not a place to be subjected to further
punishment. Yet strip searching mirrors the power
dynamics in coercive and controlling relationships by
humiliating and degrading a person and isolating them from
their friends, family and supports. Because people in prison
are often subjected to strip searching after and sometimes
also before visits, with some children also being subjected
to searches when meeting their incarcerated parents,46
the practice can function as a barrier to people in prison
maintaining relationships with their family and can deter
them from receiving visits.47 Strip searching also deters
people in prison from seeking legal advice and medical
treatment48 and attending court in person.49

While incarcerated at Victoria’s Dame
Phyllis Frost Centre, I was subjected to
routine strip searches at the beginning
and end of personal visits. When my mum
brought my daughter in, the officers would
check her nappy.
– Nikki, FIGJAM
It’s not just the person inside that gets
strip searched, my partner and son had
to undergo strip searching as well, for no
reason – just in order to visit me. They had
to submit to this sexual abuse because
they wouldn’t have been allowed into the
prison to see me if they didn’t.
– Zoe, FIGJAM

20

Incarcerated women are having to be
violated and expose themselves to
receive visits from their loved ones. Often
women may “choose” to withdraw from
visits because they dread being strip
searched, but it’s not a real choice: it’s
either be violated and exposed or lose our
connection to the outside world.
If you’re a parent in prison, you also don’t
really get a choice about your child being
strip searched when they enter the mother–
baby unit. Either you give signed consent
for your child to be stripped or you miss out
on spending time with your child because
you don’t want them to go through that.
– Sara, FIGJAM
My loved one isn’t having visits in prison,
I think because he does not want to be
subjected to strip searching around visits.
This adversely affects his mental health
and well–being. He had worked so hard
on his rehabilitation in the community
and now he is at risk because he’s been
unnecessarily put into the system and
doesn’t have access to the supports he
had on the outside–professional supports
and his close relationships with his chosen
and actual families.
– Kelly, FIGJAM

The dynamics of power and control which define
strip searching also deter resistance to strip searches.
Consequences for resisting strip searches can include
the use of force and the risk of being subjected to
coercive practices such as solitary confinement.50 Fear of
disciplinary repercussions can also deter people in prison
from asking questions or raising concerns during strip
searches,51 with women reporting to the QHRC Review that
they feared making complaints about inconsistent strip
search practices would lead to more invasive practices
becoming official policy.52

There are consequences for compliance
and non–compliance.
– Sara, FIGJAM
Having an emotional reaction to a strip
search or refusing to be subjected to one
can lead to being slotted*.
– Nina, FIGJAM
*Slotted: Detained in solitary confinement

When you exercise agency in prison, you
get punished.
– Stacey Stokes, FIGJAM

Ending strip searching in Australian prisons

21

3.
Strip searching traumatises
over–incarcerated
communities
Strip searching causes disproportionate trauma to
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, women,
trans and gender diverse people and children in prison. In
this context, strip searching amounts to racial and gendered
violence, as well as child abuse.

Through my work supporting women in
prison, I have heard time and time again
about individual prison guards – and
groups of guards – using strip searching
as a way to punish and control people in
prison. Since they have broad discretion
to strip search, their choices about
who to target are often influenced by
biases, including racism, sexism and
transphobia.
– Karen Fletcher, Executive Officer at
Flat Out

Impacts on Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
peoples
Due to the ongoing impacts of colonisation, including
laws and policies infected by systemic racism and
discriminatory policing, Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander peoples are over–incarcerated, with the rate of
incarceration continuing to increase nationally for First
Nations adults.53
As a result of their mass incarceration, Aboriginal and
Torres Strait Islander peoples are disproportionately
subjected to, and harmed by, degrading prison practices
like strip searching.

22

percent
In Queensland, in the three–month period between
February and April 2022, data obtained by the
Human Rights Law Centre shows that the prison
with the largest volume of strip searches – 3,845,
or 26.08%, of the 14,741 recorded strip searches
during this period – was Lotus Glen, a men’s prison
where approximately 70% of people in prison are
Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander.54
In the seven–month period between October
2020 and April 2021, 370 or 53.08%, of 697
recorded strip searches at Brisbane, Cleveland and
West Moreton youth prisons were conducted on
Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander children.
In Western Australia, in the seven–month period
between October 2020 and April 2021, Aboriginal
and/or Torres Strait Islander women in Western
Australian prisons were subjected to 2,392 recorded
strip searches, nearly half (49%) of the total number
of strip searches of women during this period.

Prison guards have a huge amount of
power to decide who gets strip searched.
There is definitely racism at play inside
prison, and I think some guards target
Aboriginal people, thinking, ‘They’re Black,
they’re known for contraband.’ When I was
put in the slot, I was subjected to a strip
search just to get a kettle and a TV – basic
items you need in solitary confinement.
I’m not known to self–harm or to carry
contraband, there was no reason to strip
search me.
– Jana, FIGJAM

Data obtained by the Human Rights Law Centre showed
that, even accounting for their over–incarceration,
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples were
disproportionately strip searched, indicating potentially
discriminatory treatment by prison guards.

percent

Similarly, the ACT Inspector of Custodial Services reported
that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women remained
over-represented among those subjected to strip searches
in the ACT’s adult prison: in 2024, 48% of strip searches
conducted on women were of Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander women, despite them comprising 39% of all
women in prison.55

In the ACT, in the seven–month period between
October 2021 and April 2022, 371, or 31.12%, of
1,192 recorded strip searches were conducted on
Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander adults.
This is disproportionate, even accounting for the
over–representation of Aboriginal and/or Torres
Strait Islander people in the ACT’s prison: at
30 June 2022, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander
people comprised 25.2% of all people in prison in
the ACT.56

Gendered impacts

I am an older woman and a lot of the
women I connected with in prison were
older women. Most of the women were
survivors of family violence and sexual
assaults, whether as children or as adults.
Strip searching is deeply traumatic and
triggering, and it sets people back to go into
prison and be strip searched repeatedly.

Strip searching is a gendered tactic of state violence that
draws on patriarchal logics of control, domination and
sexual humiliation.57 It acutely harms women in prison,
particularly the high numbers of women in prison who
have experienced sexual and family violence.58

When strip searched, I had to bend over
and part my cheeks for close inspection.
As a young child, I sustained abuse. These
invasive searches re–traumatised me.
– Nikki, FIGJAM
Like many women in prison, I’m a survivor
of child sexual abuse. Being strip searched
by guards is an abuse of power that is
deeply harmful and retraumatising. From
my first reception into custody—being strip
searched, then forced to shower while
being watched by guards—I was sent into
a spiral about what other harms I’d face in
prison. Previously, while being transferred
between police stations, I was in secure
custody the whole time, yet strip searched
multiple times in one night. Strip searching
isn’t something you ever get used to; it
takes you back to all these past abuses. Yet
the prison system treats you as an offender,
not as a victim of what it puts you through,
and offers no support.
– Stacey, FIGJAM

Ending strip searching in Australian prisons

Strip searching is especially invasive
for older women and for people from
cultures where norms of bodily privacy and
modesty are strongly held – exposing your
body feels shameful. It makes you feel so
inhuman, and the screws don’t look at you
as a person or empathise with the impact
strip searches have on you, particularly the
first time you go through it and you’ve not
experienced anything like it before.
Strip searching is never done with any
form of sensitivity and respect, and it can’t
be – it is inherently dehumanising. Even
when it’s female guards searching you,
there are cameras around and you never
know who is watching – the possibility that
male guards are watching or access that
footage is disturbing.
Women develop coping mechanisms to
submit to strip searching. Older women will
often emotionally shut down and hold all
that shame in. They leave prison with that
shame, having never had any counselling
or support to work through it.
– Cathy Campesato, FIGJAM
23

For Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women, who
experience higher rates and more severe forms of violence
compared to non–Indigenous women,59 strip searching can
be especially re–traumatising.
Strip searching also excessively harms trans and gender
diverse people, who are disproportionately incarcerated,
experience greater rates of interpersonal violence,
including identity-based and sexual violence, and are
further exposed to gendered violence in the binary and
cisnormative prison environment.60 The ACT Inspector of
Custodial Services’ 2025 review of the adult prison noted
that the two trans people in prison during the review period
were subjected to a disproportionately high number of strip
searches.61
The QHRC Review heard from prison guards that people in
prison were being searched according to their sex assigned
at birth or gender affirming surgery, not their self–
identified gender and preference.62 This discriminatory
practice exacerbates the distress of those trans and gender
diverse people in prison who cannot access gender
affirming treatment. This distress is compounded by the
fact that most trans and gender diverse people are detained
in prisons that do not align with their gender and subjected
to vilification, violence and harmful prison practices such
as solitary confinement.63

As a minimum requirement, trans and gender diverse
people in prison should have the right to choose, on the
basis of gender, which prison guards will search the top
and bottom halves of their bodies.64 In Queensland’s youth
prisons, regulations passed in 2024 now provide that
gender diverse children in prison may nominate the sex
of the guard conducting the strip search.65 Similarly, strip
searching policies in Victoria, NSW, Tasmania, ACT and
Western Australia generally permit people in prison to
choose the gender of the guard conducting searches.66 In
practice, however, there continue to be issues with prison
guards complying with these policies.67

As a trans woman formerly incarcerated in
a men’s prison in Victoria, when I was made
to strip, I would request a female guard for
my top half and a male guard for my bottom
half. Guards would weaponise my request
by making me wait hours in a holding cell
while they supposedly looked for a female
guard to conduct part of the search. During
this time, I would miss any appointments
that I had.
Strip searches are particularly upsetting
for trans people inside because they
disassociate so much from the parts of
their bodies that guards focus on. Guards
would pick on trans girls by telling them
to pull their foreskins back during strip
searches, knowing how triggering that
would be for them.
– Stacey Stokes, FIGJAM
Not only does strip searching re–victimise and re–
traumatise people with lived experience of violence
by subjecting them to sexual violence under threat of
consequence by prison guards, its widespread use in men’s
prisons also legitimises tactics of control and humiliation
that underpin gender–based violence.

24

Impacts on children
No child belongs in prison. Yet, due to the low age of
criminal responsibility in most jurisdictions across
Australia, children as young as 10 years old are
incarcerated and can be subjected to strip searching.
This practice disproportionately impacts children who are
over–incarcerated, including Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander children, children with disability and drug and
alcohol dependencies, and children with complex trauma.68
Strip searching is a particularly stark “manifestation
of power relations”69, involving children being made to
remove their clothing for inspection by adult prison guards.
It compounds the existing trauma of the high numbers of
children in prison who have experienced violence, abuse
and neglect at the hands of adults.

Further abuses of power connected to
strip searching
Despite the breadth of powers granted to prison
guards to strip search children, a culture of impunity
in youth prisons has meant that guards have exceeded
these powers. For instance, the Northern Territory
Royal Commission into the abuses at Don Dale youth
prison found that girls had been inappropriately
physically handled, restrained and stripped of their
clothing by male prison guards,70 and that children
were being subjected to random strip–searching
following family visits without any justification.71
Perpetrators of child sexual abuse have also exploited
strip searching practices to groom and sexually
abuse children in prison. For example, the Royal
Commission into Institutional Responses to Child
Sexual Abuse documented victim survivors’ accounts
of prison guards digitally penetrating, touching and
sexualising them under the cover of strip searching.72
In response to calls for reform, some Australian
jurisdictions have enacted laws which limit the use of
strip searches on children in prison by introducing the
requirement of reasonable necessity.73

25

Northern Territory

Tasmania

Following recommendations made by the Northern
Territory Royal Commission into abuses at the
Don Dale youth prison,74 the Northern Territory
government amended its Youth Justice Act 2005
(NT) to provide that strip searches of children may
only be directed where a superintendent believes on
reasonable grounds that the search is necessary to
prevent a risk of harm to the child or another person.75

Data obtained by the Human Rights Law Centre
revealed that 203 strip searches were performed on
children over a six month period in 2018, with no
contraband found. This data, together with a string
of distressing incidents in 2019, 76 prompted calls for
reform by the Tasmanian Commissioner of Children
and Young People.77

In response to subsequent requests made by the
Human Rights Law Centre for strip search data
for Don Dale and Alice Springs youth prisons over
two seven–month periods, from October 2020 to
April 2021 and October 2021 to April 2022, the
Department of Territory Families, Housing and
Communities stated that no strip searches were
conducted during these periods and that it is not
the Department’s policy to conduct pat down or
personal searches routinely.

26

Following a public consultation process and
sustained advocacy by the Human Rights Law Centre
alongside the Tasmanian Aboriginal Legal Service,
a 2022 amendment to Tasmania’s Youth Justice Act
1997 subsequently provided that children in custody
should only ever be strip searched when the search
officer reasonably believes it is necessary for a
designated purpose, and that the manner and type of
the search must be proportionate to that purpose.78
This reform should have eliminated the routine strip
searching of children in custody in Tasmania. A
2025 report by the Office of the Custodial Inspector
Tasmania notes a smaller number of strip searches
conducted on children at Hobart prison: three strip
searches were conducted on children in the first six
months of 2023, when there were 144 receptions
into the prison; and one strip search was conducted
on children in the first eight months of 2024, when
there were 181 receptions.79 While the reasons for
these strip searches are not given, the reference to
receptions may imply that these strip searches were
conducted routinely in the context of receptions of
children into prison.

4.
Strip searching practices
breach human rights standards
Human rights implications of strip searching
Strip searching limits the rights of people in prison to
freedom from torture and cruel, inhuman and degrading
treatment or punishment; humane treatment when deprived
of their liberty; privacy; equality; and the protection of
families and children.
These rights are protected in international human rights
treaties to which Australia is a party, including the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,80 the
Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or
Degrading Treatment or Punishment,81 and the Convention
on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against
Women.82 They are also protected under domestic human
rights laws in the ACT,83 Victoria84 and Queensland.85
While not in the context of strip searching in prisons,
recently in NSW, where international human rights
are yet to be expressly enshrined in domestic law, the
unlawful strip search conducted by police at a music
festival on the lead plaintiff in a class action was held
to strike at the “core interests” protected by the torts
of false imprisonment, assault and battery – namely
dignity, personal privacy and personal bodily integrity –
and violations of these interests were taken into account
in the award of damages to the plaintiff.86
Pursuant to international human rights law, strip
searches can constitute ill–treatment when conducted
in a disproportionate, humiliating or discriminatory
manner. When conducted for a prohibited purpose or for
any discriminatory reason and leading to severe pain or
suffering, strip searches amount to torture.87

Ending strip searching in Australian prisons

United Nations minimum standards provide further
guidance on the treatment of people in prison. The Nelson
Mandela Rules require that intrusive searches, including
strip searches, should be undertaken only if ‘absolutely
necessary’, with prison administrations encouraged to
develop and use appropriate alternatives to intrusive
searches.88 Searches should not be used to harass,
intimidate or unnecessarily intrude on privacy, and records
should be kept of the searches, the reason for the searches,
who conducted them, and the results of the search.89
The Bangkok Rules on the treatment of women in prison
additionally require their personal histories, including
experiences of trauma, abuse, or violence, to be taken into
account in any rehabilitation and reintegration efforts.90
These rules also require alternative screening methods,
such as scans, to be developed to replace strip searches,
in order to avoid the harmful impacts they cause.91

“The availability of less invasive
alternatives to strip searching means
that it should not be ‘necessary’ to
subject people in prisons to the cruel and
degrading practice. Ongoing use of strip
searching therefore calls into question
government compliance with international
human rights standards.”
– Monique Hurley, Associate Legal Director
at the Human Rights Law Centre

27

Access to justice for human rights violations
The entrenched, routine use of strip searching and
patchy availability of alternatives in Australian prisons
exposes Australian governments’ disregard for the
requirement of ‘absolute necessity’ under the Nelson
Mandela Rules.
This disregard for the rights of people in prison is
exacerbated by the failure of Australian governments
to directly and adequately incorporate Australia’s
international human rights obligations into domestic law.
While human rights laws have been enacted in Queensland,
the ACT and Victoria,92 there remain significant barriers to
people enforcing their rights. In Victoria and Queensland,
human rights claims must accompany another primary
cause of action, preventing standalone human rights
challenges.93 The remedies available for breaches of
human rights are also limited in the ACT, Victoria
and Queensland, which do not permit the recovery of
damages.94
In this context, alongside the normalisation of prison strip
searches and the broad powers to conduct them, few legal
challenges have successfully challenged strip searching in
prisons under Australian human rights laws.

file
Thompson v Minogue [2021] VSCA 358
The Victorian Court of Appeal found that two of
the three strip searches challenged by Dr Minogue
at Barwon Prison, a maximum–security men’s
prison in Victoria, unjustifiably interfered with
his rights under the Charter of Human Rights and
Responsibilities Act 2006 (Vic).95
The invasive nature of the full strip search
procedure,96 especially when required before a
random, supervised urine test,97 was found to have
severely limited Dr Minogue’s rights to privacy and
humane treatment when deprived of liberty.98
The Court reasoned that the severity of these
interferences were not proportionate to ensuring
the security of prisons and the welfare of people in
prison.99 Importantly, there was insufficient evidence
to prove that full strip searches were the “only”
effective way to prevent urine sample interference,
as alleged by the Governor of Barwon Prison,100
or that they were necessary at all.101 The Court
considered that less restrictive alternatives, like
body scans, may have been reasonably available.102

While it is significant that the Victorian Court of Appeal
confirmed that the practice of routine and invasive strip
searches before random urine tests was incompatible
with human rights, the case law to date has not ruled out
strip searches in the multitude of circumstances in which
people are still subjected to them. For example, following
Thompson v Minogue, nearly 500 strip searches were
recorded at Port Philip Prison, a maximum security men’s
prison and Victoria’s largest prison, in one single month.103

28

file
Williams v Director–General of the Justice
and Community Safety Directorate [2025]
ACTSC 396
More recently, the ACT Supreme Court found that
an attempted strip search of a “highly vulnerable”104
Aboriginal woman, who had refused a strip search
and was otherwise quiet and lying on her bed when
four guards sat on top of her and attempted to cut
her clothes off in the presence of male guards,
breached her rights to humane and appropriate
treatment while deprived of her liberty on remand,
as well as her right to privacy and protection from
degrading treatment.105
A subsequent strip search of the Aboriginal woman
in the bathroom, though conducted in accordance
with the relevant policy, was also held to breach her
right to appropriate treatment while detained on
remand and to privacy, noting that the circumstances
of the strip were tainted and that the Aboriginal
woman’s ‘consent’ was obtained in circumstances of
severe distress and degradation.106

Ending strip searching in Australian prisons

In jurisdictions without enforceable human rights laws,
people are deprived of mechanisms to seek effective
remedy. Australia needs robust human rights protections
in every state and territory: if legislated and enforceable,
they could be used to seek accountability for government
practices which are incompatible with people’s rights,
like arbitrary strip searching. Enforceable human rights
protections also require improved access to justice.
While dedicated, standalone legal services for people
in prison exist in Queensland, all state and territory
governments should establish and resource independent
legal and advocacy services for people in prison, including
Aboriginal Legal Services for Aboriginal and Torres Strait
Islander peoples in prison, to help people enforce their
rights. Relevant to the ability of people in prison subjected
to strip searching to safely engage with the criminal legal
system, the Australian Law Reform Commission recently
recommended that all Australian governments fund the
provision of independent legal services for every person
who has experienced sexual violence.107

Crisis of secrecy in prisons
Inadequate record keeping, limited access to information
and the lack of independent oversight are barriers to
holding governments to account for strip search practices
in prisons.

There is a crisis of secrecy in prisons.
Transparency and recording the number
of strip searches, and the reasons for
them, are essential and bare minimum
safeguards against the abuses that this
report shows can thrive behind bars.
– Monique Hurley, Associate Legal Director
at the Human Rights Law Centre

29

Inadequate record keeping
Some Australian jurisdictions do not require prisons to
keep any, or any adequate, records of strip searches.

In response to an information request made by the
Human Rights Law Centre, the NSW Department of
Communities and Justice admitted that strip searches
were conducted routinely in NSW prisons but “only a
small percentage” of them were recorded.

“…the Department’s record keeping
system does not record the total number
of strip searches involving inmates.
Unlike [Youth Justice New South Wales],
there are no registers of logbooks where
strip searches are centrally recorded for
inmates.
This is because strip searches are mainly
conducted as part of correctional centre
routine, procedure, and policy. They may
be conducted when inmates are departing
or returning to a correctional centre, after a
visit, on arrival to court, when participating
in external leave programs, when placed in
an assessment cell, among other things.
These are not necessarily recorded
each time and consequently only a small
percentage of strip searches are recorded
on the Offender Integrated Management
System (OIMS)”108

In Western Australia, the Human Rights Law Centre was
unable to obtain data on strip searching in adult and youth
prisons in Western Australia for the period covering 1
October 2021 to 30 April 2022; the Department of Justice
refused to disclose strip search records because no central
register of prison strip searches existed.
Even where prisons keep records of strip searches, they
frequently fail to record information sufficient to monitor
their use as a tool of punishment and control, or in
circumstances which are not authorised by law.

In response to a request for information, Northern
Territory Correctional Services informed the Human
Rights Law Centre in May 2021 that prison strip
search registers do not record the reasons why strip
searches are conducted.

In relation to some women’s prisons in Queensland, the
Human Rights Law Centre obtained strip search registers
which simply cited the broad statutory provisions under
which strip searches may be authorised without detailing the
individual circumstances giving rise to each strip search.109
Prison strip search records do not generally state whether
any items found during strip searches pose a significant
risk of harm to people in prison, and sometimes fail
to specify the nature of any items found. Without this
information, it is difficult to assess the effectiveness of
strip searching as a purported method of contraband
detection. In some jurisdictions, where relatively higher
numbers of items were reportedly identified in strip
searches, many of the items found were unlikely to pose
any significant risk to the safety of people in prison.

percent
In Queensland, the most recent data obtained by
the Human Rights Law Centre on strip searching
in Brisbane, Cleveland and West Moreton youth
prisons, covering the three–month period between
February and April 2022, indicated that 44 items
were identified in 24 (5.57%) of 430 strip searches of
children. Items, however, included three white board
markers, two rolling papers, nail clippers, a vape, a
piece from a smoke detector, a pen, playing cards
and an unspecified item.

The gender, race and ethnicity of the people subjected to
strip searching – key information needed to monitor and
address the discriminatory impacts of strip searching–
are also rarely recorded. For instance, in the second
phase of data collection, we requested information on
the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander status of people
subjected to strip searches. Only two jurisdictions were
able to provide this data: Tasmania for children and the
ACT for adults.

30

Even where prisons are required by law or regulations
to maintain records, poor record–keeping practices
undermine the reliability of strip search records.110

There are lots of situations where strip
searches are not recorded even when
they’re supposed to be.
At times, SESG* officers would conduct
mass strip searches of an entire unit
without carrying their strip search
registers, and I doubt these searches were
properly documented.
*SESG: Security and Emergency Services Group, a
tactical unit within Corrections Victoria.

Ending strip searching in Australian prisons

On a separate occasion, shortly after I
reported one of many sexual assaults
I was subjected to at Hopkins prison in
Victoria, I was strip searched by a single
male officer, in circumstances where every
strip search was meant to be conducted
by at least two officers so as to avoid
“misunderstandings”.
After this incident I felt very violated, as I
was already in a fragile state of mind due
to the recent sexual assault. So, I reported
this violation by the male officer.  
The officers said I was a liar and pointed
to false records which indicated that
everything was done as per procedure.
The case was closed, until my lawyers
demanded to view the security footage.
After that, upon review, the prison’s general
manager upheld what I had said. Everything
we say is a lie until we prove it’s not.
– Stacey Stokes, FIGJAM

31

Limited access to information

Independent oversight of prisons

The issue of inadequate record keeping is compounded by
difficulties accessing information on prison strip searches.

A light must be shone on the cruelty allowed to thrive in the
darkness behind prison walls. As a signatory to the United
Nations’ anti–torture protocol, the Optional Protocol to
the Convention Against Torture (OPCAT), Australia is
obliged to establish and facilitate “a system of regular
visits undertaken by independent international and national
bodies to places where people are deprived of their liberty,
in order to prevent torture”.112

Much of the data on strip searching in prisons in the
Supplementary Paper was obtained by the Human Rights
Law Centre over years of protracted correspondence with
government departments in multiple jurisdictions. In some
cases, the Human Rights Law Centre had to significantly
narrow the scope of its information requests to avoid
them being rejected on the basis that collating the relevant
records would amount to an unreasonable diversion
of resources. For example, in relation to a request for
information regarding strip searches in all youth prisons
in NSW between October 2021 and April 2022, the Human
Rights Law Centre was only able to obtain data covering
just one month for two youth prisons.
As a result, the information requests yielded snapshots of
strip search data at varying points in time. This makes it
difficult to analyse trends in prison strip searching in any
one jurisdiction, and to compare strip searching practices
in multiple jurisdictions over the same period of time.
Rather than having to pursue resource–intensive requests
to obtain information on strip searching in prisons,
the default should be that this information is regularly
published, while protecting the identities of those subjected
to strip searching.
One example of improved practice is the publication of
quarterly data on strip searches, since January 2023, on
the website of the Victorian Department of Justice and
Community Safety.111 This data includes the number of
strip searches and body scanner searches in youth prisons.
At minimum, prisons should be recording and publishing
the grounds for any search, together with any items
identified by the search; the identity, age, gender, race and/
or ethnicity of the person subjected to search; the identities
of those who conducted the search; and the prison at which
the search took place.

32

OPCAT was ratified by the Australian Government in
2017; while some states and territories have taken steps to
implement OPCAT – with varying levels of compliance –
to date, the NSW, Victorian and Queensland governments
have yet to nominate the required independent bodies
to monitor places of detention, known as a National
Preventive Mechanisms.113
In jurisdictions which have nominated National Preventive
Mechanisms, independent monitoring bodies have
identified issues with strip searching practices. For
example, in the ACT, the Custodial Inspector’s 2022
review of the adult prison found that, for the 4,077 strip
searches conducted in 2020–21, ACT Corrective Services
failed to record the purported grounds for search under
the Corrections Management Act 2007 (ACT).114 The
subsequent ACT Inspector of Custodial Services’ 2025
review found these issues had still not been addressed.115
In Victoria, where the government has yet to nominate a
National Preventive Mechanism, the Victorian Ombudsman
conducted its first, and to date only, OPCAT–style
inspection of its maximum security women’s prison over
eight years ago in 2017 and concluded that the routine
practice of strip searching women breached rights to
privacy, to protection from cruel, inhuman or degrading
treatment and to humane treatment when deprived of
liberty under the Victorian Charter of Human Rights and
Responsibilities.116
In order to monitor and prevent the mistreatment of
people in prison, all Australian governments must
establish and adequately resource independent bodies to
regularly conduct unannounced inspections of prisons.117
At minimum, inspectors should have access to all
information necessary to monitor searches of people in
prison, including search registers.

While prisons are required to record who
conducts searches, this information isn’t
made public. It is particularly important
that independent inspectors have access
to unredacted search records to identify
both systemic issues and problems with
specific guards. They should also be taking
steps to verify the accuracy of search
records by interviewing people in prison
and viewing security footage.

Australian governments must also facilitate access to all
places of detention by the United Nations Subcommittee
on Prevention of Torture (SPT), as required by OPCAT, as
well as by other United Nations bodies such as the United
Nations Working Group on Arbitrary Detention (WGAD).
In recent years, multiple Australian jurisdictions have
obstructed accountability by denying such access: during
the 2025 visit of the WGAD, the Northern Territory and
Western Australia refused access to places of detention.118
Previously, during the 2022 visit of the SPT, NSW and
Queensland also denied access, leading to the termination
of that visit.119

We know that some people who take prison
roles abuse power intentionally. Given their
access to power, guards should be getting
scrutinised more than we are. Where they
are found to be abusing power, they need
to be held to account.
– Stacey Stokes, FIGJAM

Deaths in custody rally in Melbourne/Naarm. Credit: Matt Hrkac.
33

5.
There are less invasive
alternatives to strip searching
All Australian governments must ban the use of strip
searches in prisons in law. Where absolutely necessary
and as a last resort, there are less intrusive alternatives
that could be used, like scanners similar to those used at
airports and public buildings across the country.

Nobody can give an answer as to why strip
searching needs to be done. In this day
and age, there are less invasive scanners
that do the job. There isn’t any empathy
for what it feels like when you’re strip
searched. If there was, everyone would
know and accept that there is no reason to
put anyone through a strip search.
– Cathy Campesato, FIGJAM

Body scanners and other alternatives to strip
searching
As required by international human rights law, and as
recommended by a multitude of bodies including the
Western Australian Office of the Inspector of Custodial
Services,120 the NSW Inspector of Custodial Services121
and the Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to
Child Sexual Abuse,122 alternatives to strip searching must
be developed. At this point, it is difficult to understand why
some prisons still lack scanning technologies.123 Prisons
that have scaled back the use of strip searches have not
seen a corresponding rise in the entry of contraband.124
A number of scanners are already available in prisons
across the country and have reduced unnecessary prison
strip searches.125 The Australian Law Reform Commission
recently noted that this should inform the expanded use of
body scanners across all jurisdictions.126

percent
In South Australia, following the installation of
body scanning technology at the Kurlana Tapa
youth prison in August 2020, the South Australian
Department of Human Services reported in
response to information requests by the Human
Rights Law Centre that no strip searches were
recorded in the seven–month periods between
October 2020 to April 2021 and October 2021 to
April 2022 at Kurlana Tapa. This is in contrast
to 676 recorded strip searches conducted on
children at Kurlana Tapa in the six–month period
between June 2018 and November 2018, prior to the
installation of the scanners.
Similarly, since the introduction of two scanners at
the ACT’s adult prison in 2023, it has been reported
that the number of strip searches has reduced from
over 4,000 in 2020–21 to 580 in 2024.127

In recognition of the harmful impact of strip searches on
children in particular, some Australian jurisdictions have
amended the law, prison policies and minimum standards
to reduce reliance on strip searches in favour of less
intrusive alternatives.
In South Australia, a General Manager’s Notice, effective
from 7 August 2020, provides that strip searches in Kurlana
Tapa youth prison should only occur as a last resort where
body scanning technology supports the need for the strip
search; the child has been given multiple opportunities to
surrender any contraband; and body scanning, pat–down
and wand searches has not eliminated the possibility of
contraband.128
In 2024, the ACT Inspector of Correctional Services
updated its youth prison standards – a benchmarking
tool which lacks the force of law – to provide that strip
searching should not be used, and that body scanners
or direct observations should be used as alternatives.129
Given that policies can be amended with lesser scrutiny
than legislation, and to remove any uncertainty in
interpretation, reforms aiming to eliminate strip searching
must be expressly provided for in law.

34

Regulating alternatives to strip searching
While the use of modern technology and scanners
represent progress, reliance on strip searching persists
when body scanning is used alongside strip searching,
rather than as an alternative. For example, between 1
March 2023 and 29 February 2024, the Brisbane youth
prison recorded 1,300 strip searches compared with just
24 electronic body scans.130 The scanner was recorded
as broken in May 2023, and inspectors were unable to
determine whether the fault was logged or whether any
steps had been taken to repair it.131
The combined use of body scanning and strip searching
can also generate further unnecessary strip searches
and invasions of privacy and dignity.

While I was imprisoned at Victoria’s
Dame Phyllis Frost Centre, a scanning
machine was installed in the visits section.
This helped reduce the number of strip
searches, but if the machine detected
anything in a routine scan after a visit, you
were still required to undergo a strip search
– Nikki, FIGJAM
I don’t understand why it was necessary
to scan me when I was received at prison
after court, especially since I had already
been strip searched at the court
– Georgia Sheales, FIGJAM
It is therefore vital that strip searches are banned and body
scanners and other alternatives to strip searches are not
deployed by prison guards in the same manner as strip
searches – that is, for control or other improper purposes.
The risks of abuse are illustrated by a case recently
reported by the ACT Inspector of Custodial Services,
in which a person was segregated and charged with a
disciplinary offence after an alleged anomaly on a body
scan. Although a subsequent scan and drug test were clear,
the person’s ‘segregation’ was nonetheless extended.132
In many cases, scanning technology and other less invasive
searches may be unnecessary due to existing control
measures in prisons. For example, the QHRC Review found
that saliva swab testing is an effective and less invasive
alternative to urine drugs testing, which is preceded by
mandatory strip searches and thus drives high strip search
rates in Queensland women’s prisons.133 Since saliva swab
testing eliminates the risk of sample tampering, less
invasive alternatives like body scanners or other searches
become unnecessary.

Searches are also unnecessary when people in prison are
already in secure custody and under direct supervision. A
November 2025 report of inspections of three Queensland
youth prisons found that West Moreton youth prison was
“doing more searches than they need to”; noting that 120
strip searches recorded during admissions to the prison
between 1 December 2022 and 30 November 2023 were
conducted on children transferred from another prison
or watchhouse. 134 The report also found that children at
Brisbane youth prison were subjected to strip searches
when returning from a leave of absence, despite being
accompanied by staff throughout the leave. 135

When you’re being escorted by guards,
you’re under constant watch, so there’s
no need to search you by any means.
– Stacey Stokes, FIGJAM
The law must therefore prescribe that alternative search
methods and scanning technology must only ever be used
as a last resort in cases of absolute necessity, after less
intrusive alternatives have already been exhausted and
there remains reasonable and specific intelligence about
the concealment of dangerous contraband that poses a
significant risk to safety.
The use of alternative search methods or scanning
technology should be subject to individual risk assessment
and relevant human rights considerations given that body
scanners and other alternatives can still interfere with the
privacy and dignity rights of people in prison.

Prison scanners create very clear, detailed
images and can lead to invasions of
privacy. One time when I was scanned, the
officers commented on the fact that I was
wearing a bikini top under my clothes.
– Georgia Sheales, FIGJAM
Alternatives to strip searching like pat
down searches are also invasive and can
be used as cover for other abuses of power.
On one occasion, when I was subjected to
a pat down search, the male guard patted
down and ran their hand over my breasts
during the search.
– Stacey Stokes, FIGJAM

Less invasive bodyscanner technology available. Credit: Gerti at R&S.
Ending strip searching in Australian prisons

35

36

CONCLUSION
Support people and communities,
not prisons
“Let this radicalize you rather than
lead you to despair.” 136
– Mariame Kaba
Everyone deserves to be treated with dignity, and as this
report has shown, strip searches are an unnecessary,
ineffective and harmful form of state–perpetrated violence.
The use of the practice cannot be justified. Safer,
less invasive and more effective alternatives exist. In
recognition of this, all Australian governments should ban
the use of strip searches in prisons in law.
Imprisonment harms rather than heals, with strip searches
only one cruel carceral tool of many that undermine any
rehabilitative purpose that prisons purport to serve. Their
ongoing, normalised use in prisons across the country
confirms that prisons cannot be sites of rehabilitation.

This report is being published at a time when the country is
experiencing a mass imprisonment crisis and the number of
people being pipelined into prisons is skyrocketing due to
discriminatory and turbo–charged ‘tough on crime’ politics.
Prisons are increasingly being used as warehouses for people
who have been marginalised and failed by the government.
An extensive body of research makes clear that harsh
punishment fails to prevent acts of violence, and that we need
to move beyond a fixation on short–term, overly punitive
measures towards solutions that work to address what causes
people to be criminalised in the first place.
Alongside ending the strip searching of people in prisons,
governments need to do the right thing by building up the
community services required to support people and divert
them away from prisons, where they are at risk of being
subjected to the harms detailed in this report.

Deaths in custody rally in Melbourne/Naarm. Credit: Matt Hrkac.

Ending strip searching in Australian prisons

37

ENDNOTES
1

See, eg, Debbie Kilroy and Tabitha Lean,
‘State–sanctioned sexual assault: the
injustice of strip searching women in
prisons’, Croakey Health Media (Webpage,
30 January 2024) <https://www.croakey.
org/state–sanctioned–sexual–assault–the–
injustice–of–strip–searching–women–in–
prisons>; Debbie Kilroy, ‘Strip–Searching:
Stop the State’s Sexual Assault of Women
in Prison’ (2003) 12 Journal of Prisoners
on Prisons 30, 34– 36.

11

27

Kilroy and Lean (n 1); Amanda George,
Strip Searches: Sexual Assault by the State
(1993) 18 Alternative Law Journal 31–33.

28

Jessica Hutchison, ‘“It’s Sexual Assault.
It’s Barbaric”: Strip Searching in Women’s
Prisons as State–inflicted Sexual Assault’
(2020) 35(2) Affilia: Feminist Inquiry in
Social Work 170.

29

QHRC (n 5) 59.

30

Ibid 60.

31

Kilroy and Lean (n 1); George (n 27).

32

Hutchison (n 28) 171.

33

Ibid 160, 169.

34

Bree Carlton and Emma Russell, ‘The
Weaponisation of ‘Trauma‑Informed’
Discourse in Prison Policy: An Abolition
Feminist Critique’ (2023) 4 Incarceration
17.

35

Flat Out, Submission No 980 to the Royal
Commission into Family Violence (29 May
2015).

36

Office of the Inspector of Custodial
Services (WA) (OICS), Strip searching
practices in Western Australian prisons
(Report, March 2019) 8–9.

ACT Human Rights Commission, Human
Rights Audit on the Operation of ACT
Correctional Facilities under Corrections
Legislation (Audit Report, July 2007).

37

Ibid.

18

Ibid 7.

38

Ibid.

Australian Bureau of Statistics, ‘Key
statistics’, Prisoners in Australia (Web
report, 19 December 2024) <https://
www.abs.gov.au/statistics/people/crime–
and–justice/prisoners–australia/2024>;
Australian Institute of Health and Welfare,
Adults in prison (Web article, 15 November
2023) <https://www.aihw.gov.au/reports/
australias–welfare/adults–in–prison>.

19

QHRC (n 5) 5.

39

20

Corrections Management (Searching)
Policy 2022 (ACT) s 8.11. This instrument
has since repealed and replaced by the
Corrections Management (Searching)
Policy 2023 (ACT), which retains the same
requirements in section 8.12.

Corrections and Sentencing Legislation
Amendment Act 2023 (ACT).

40

21

See further the Supplementary Paper.

Australian Bureau of Statistics, ‘Australia’,
Recorded Crime – Offenders (Web report,
6 March 2025) <https://www.abs.gov.
au/statistics/people/crime–and–justice/
recorded–crime–offenders/latest–release>;
See also Productivity Commission,
Australia has fewer criminal offenders
but more people in prison (Web article,
18 October 2021) <https://www.pc.gov.au/
media–speeches/articles/imprisonment>.

22

New South Wales Department of
Communities and Justice, Searching
inmates (Custodial Operations Policy and
Procedures 17.1, version 1.13, 13 June 2024)
10 <https://dcj.nsw.gov.au/content/dam/
dcj/corrective–services–nsw/documents/
copp/17–searching/17.01–searching–
inmates.pdf>.

ACT Office of the Inspector of Custodial
Services, Healthy Prison Review of the
Alexander Maconochie Centre 2025
(Report, 27 November 2025) 84 <www.
ics.act.gov.au/reports and publications/
healthy prison reviews/healthy prison
review of the alexander maconochie
centre 2025>.

41

CRACCS (n 4) 656–657.

42

IBAC (n 8) 53.

43

OICS (n 17) 4–5.

44

Ombudsman NT, Separate Confinement:
A Thematic Investigation into Practices in
Darwin Correctional Centre (Report, May
2024) 56.

12

Ibid 15–19.

13

Corrections Act 1986 (Vic) s 45(1)(b).
See also Corrective Services Act 2006
(Qld) s 33(2), Corrections Act 1997 (Tas)
s 22(1A), Prisons Act 1981 (WA) s 41(1)(c),
Corrections Management Act 2007 (ACT) s
111(1).

Human Rights Law Centre (HRLC), Total
Control: ending the routine strip searching
of women in Victoria’s prisons (Report, 7
December 2017).

2

3

Premier of Victoria, ‘New Gatehouse to
Boost Security and Keep People Safe’
(Media release, 13 January 2020) <https://
www.premier.vic.gov.au/new–gatehouse–
boost–security–and–keep–people–safe>.

4

Cultural Review of the Adult Custodial
Corrections System (CRACCS), Safer
Prisons, Safer People, Safer Communities
(Final Report, December 2022) 656–659.

5

Queensland Human Rights Commission
(QHRC), Stripped of our dignity: A human
rights review of policies, procedures, and
practices in relation to strip searches
of women in Queensland prisons (Final
Report, 20 September 2023) 44, citing
Corrections Victoria consultation, 5 May
2023.

6

7

8

Independent Broad–based Anti–
corruption Commission (IBAC), Special
report on Corrections: IBAC Operations
Rous, Caparra, Nisidia and Molara
(Report, June 2021) 83.

9

Redfern Legal Centre, Strip Searches of
Children by NSW Police (Report, March
2024) 9 <https://rlc.org.au/sites/default/
files/2024–03/Strip%20Searches%20
of%20Children%20by%20NSW%20
Police_1.pdf>.

10

38

Migration Amendment (Prohibiting Items
in Immigration Detention Facilities) Act
2024 (Cth) sch 3.

Queensland Corrective Services,
Custodial Operations Practice Directive:
Prisoner Search (Date of implementation:
9 September 2025) 15<https://www.
publications.qld.gov.au/ckan–
publications–attachments–prod/resources/
f3171e45–a4b6–4c8b–9597–4f687b266948/
copd–prisoner–search–redacted.pdf>.

14

QHRC (n 5) 68, 126, 132.

15

See, eg, Explanatory Notes, Corrective
Services Bill 2006 (Qld) 59–60.

16

See, for example, Department for
Correctional Services, ‘Example
Contraband List’ (Web Page, Department
for Correctional Services, 2024) <https://
www.corrections.sa.gov.au/prison/prison–
life/prisoner–mail/mail–prohibited–
items>.

17

23

Inspector of Custodial Services (NSW),
Inspection of Mary Wade Correctional
Centre (Report, October 2020) 20.

45

QHRC (n 5) 61.

24

OICS (n 17) v; QHRC (n 5) 44.

46

CRACCS (n 4) 657.

25

Baroness Jean Corston, The Corston
Report: Review of Women with Particular
Vulnerabilities in the Criminal Justice
System (Report, Home Office,
Government of the United Kingdom,
March 2007) 31 [3.18].

47

Association for the Prevention of
Torture, Global Report on Women in
Prison: Analysis from National Preventive
Mechanisms, (Report, December 2024) 22.

48

Sisters Inside, Women and girls’ experience
of the criminal ‘justice’ system: Sisters
Inside’s response to Discussion Paper 2,
Women’s Safety and Justice Taskforce,
Queensland (Submission, 2021) 8
<https://www.womenstaskforce.qld.gov.
au/__data/assets/pdf_file/0004/692662/
wsjt–submission–dp2–sisters–inside.

26

HRLC (n 2) 24, based on correspondence
received from Operational Security Group,
Her Majesty’s Prison and Probation
Service, 15 and 18 August 2017.