Panama | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Panama At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Legal Gender Recognition Possible? Yes LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? Yes Last Update: March 12, 2026 Same-sex sexual activity has been legal in Panama since 2008, when Presidential Decree No. 332 repealed the law criminalizing sodomy on constitutional nondiscrimination grounds. However, legal recognition of LGBTIQ people remains limited. Same-sex couples cannot marry or adopt, and in March 2023, Panama’s Supreme Court ruled that same-sex marriage is not a human right under the constitution, effectively foreclosing domestic legal avenues for marriage equality. Panama has no laws explicitly prohibiting discrimination based on sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, or sex characteristics. Efforts to amend Panama’s general antidiscrimination law to include these categories were blocked by the National Assembly in 2024, claiming they were implicitly covered within the existing framework. This absence of legal protection leaves LGBTIQ people vulnerable to harassment, violence, and discrimination, none of which are formally recognized as hate crimes. Conservative religious actors and lawmakers have consistently opposed LGBTIQ-inclusive reforms, and discriminatory practices persist within state institutions, including reports of police abuse against trans women and internal police regulations that continue to characterize homosexuality as a “grave offense.” Legal gender recognition is possible only after gender-affirming surgery, a requirement that violates international human rights standards and places legal recognition out of reach for many trans people. Intersex people face even greater legal invisibility: Panama provides no specific protections for intersex people’s rights, and nonconsensual, medically unnecessary surgeries on intersex infants and children are not prohibited, leaving children vulnerable to irreversible harm. In 2025, Panama faced increased international pressure during its Universal Periodic Review at the UN Human Rights Council, where multiple states urged the government to adopt explicit antidiscrimination protections, reform gender recognition procedures, and strengthen safeguards against violence targeting LGBTIQ people. While civil society advocacy and public visibility and support continue to grow , meaningful legal reforms remain stalled, and Panama continues to lag behind much of Latin America in protecting LGBTIQ people’s rights. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International