Coroner calls for urgent investment into health care for trans community, following five tragic deaths - ABC News Skip to main content Skip to news navigation, settings and search Explore the ABC More from ABC Close menu ABC ABC News ABC iview ABC listen Kids & Students Indigenous Information & Services Editorial Policies Read our editorial guiding principles Follow the ABC news iview listen Loading ABC News Just In For You Politics World Business Analysis Sport Lifestyle Entertainment Quizzes More Search News Home Just In For You Analysis Rural Watch Live Health Indigenous Politics Science Deep Time Elections World Environment Investigations Business Local news Quizzes Sport AFL NRL Football Tennis Cricket Netball Lifestyle Wellbeing Relationships & Family Food & Recipes Personal Finance Home & Garden Entertainment TV & Movies Books Music Pop Culture Arts Facebook YouTube Instagram Twitter Emergency Backstory Newsletters 中文新闻 BERITA BAHASA INDONESIA TOK PISIN Appearance (BETA) Follow system settings Select an option Always light Always dark Follow system settings ABC iView ABC Listen ABC News News Home Coroner calls for urgent investment into health care for trans community, following five tragic deaths Share Share article Coroner calls for urgent investment into health care for trans community, following five tragic deaths By Kate Ashton Topic: Health Posted Thu 29 Aug 2024 at 6:16pm Thu 29 Aug 2024 at 6:16pm Thu 29 Aug 2024 at 6:16pm , updated Thu 29 Aug 2024 at 7:11pm Thu 29 Aug 2024 at 7:11pm Thu 29 Aug 2024 at 7:11pm Bridget Flack died by suicide in December 2020 at the age of 28. ( Supplied ) In short: A Victorian coroner who investigated the suicides of five young transgender women has recommended urgent investment to improve healthcare for trans and gender-diverse people. Coroner Ingrid Giles has also identified several failings in Victoria Police's practices and has recommended systemic reforms. What's next? The Victorian government says it's reviewing the coroner's recommendations and LGBTQIA+ organisation Switchboard Victoria says it will advocate for change to be implemented. abc.net.au/news/melbourne-inquest-into-transgender-deaths/104284898 Link copied Share Share article A Victorian coroner has recommended sweeping changes to outdated police systems and an urgent funding increase for health services supporting the trans and gender-diverse community. The nine recommendations follow an investigation by Coroner Ingrid Giles into the deaths of five young transgender women who died by suicide in Melbourne during the pandemic. If you or anyone you know needs help: Lifeline on 13 11 14 Kids Helpline on 1800 551 800 MensLine Australia on 1300 789 978 Suicide Call Back Service on 1300 659 467 Beyond Blue on 1300 224 636 Headspace on 1800 650 890 ReachOut at au.reachout.com Care Leavers Australasia Network (CLAN) on 1800 008 774 The lead case was that of 28-year-old Bridget Flack. Described by her sister Angela Pucci Love as "fiercely loyal and opinionated," Bridget went missing in December 2020. Her disappearance sparked a huge search effort from Melbourne's queer community to find her. Bridget was found 11 days later by community members. She had taken her own life. The coroner also examined the deaths of 33-year-old Natalie Wilson, 20-year-old Heather Pierard and 25-year-old Matt Byrne. Heather Pierard was remembered by her mother as "a person who brought joy to so many people." Heather Pierard died when she was 20 years old. ( Supplied: Kedra Pierard ) Matt Byrne was described as "adored", "cherished" and "studious" by her mother. Natalie Wilson was said to have become more confident when she affirmed her gender but was fearful about being discriminated against as a trans woman. The coroner also investigated the deaths of a fifth trans woman, a 19-year-old who was referred to by the pseudonym AS. LGBTQIA+ community support services We've compiled this list of national and state-based support services relevant to LGBTQIA+ people, their families and friends. While many of the group had supportive family and friends, they also struggled with mental ill-health and barriers when trying to access support services. In setting out her findings, Ms Giles detailed how the impact of discrimination on trans community members, particularly in the health system, posed "serious issues" for the health of the community and was "wholly unacceptable" in 2024. "You should not feel fear or profound dread when consulting a doctor," she said. "There should not be a myriad of horror stories circulating in the community as to what could happen if you walk through the wrong door to get support. "There should be no wrong door." Coroner requests federal intervention to stop sale of toxic substance The coroner made a recommendation requesting the federal suicide prevention minister, Emma McBride, intervene to try to further restrict the online sale of a toxic substance used in three of the five deaths. Ms Giles said this finding followed concerns raised by Matt Byrne's mother, Rachel Byrne. She noted that at least one recent coronial finding had made a similar recommendation and that the substance was linked to at least one other death interstate. "Restricting sale, is an appropriate and justifiable course of action," Ms Giles said. Victoria police failures contributed to community distress and anger The coroner found there were a number of failures during Victoria Police's investigations in the case of Bridget Flack. Bridget Flack's family say she struggled to access mental health supports before her death. ( Supplied: Angela Pucci Love ) While Victoria Police has already acknowledged some of these failures, the coroner noted it had still not acted to address them nearly four years after Bridget's death. The police decision to assess Bridget as 'medium' risk when she was reported missing despite being informed that she was experiencing mental ill-health, thought to be at risk of suicide and was transgender, was an error, the coroner found. "[The risk] ought to have been high," Ms Giles said. The subsequent failure of Victoria Police to access phone location data within a timely manner was "a significant lost opportunity," she said. The coroner did not make any findings against individual police members, noting that the failures by police were systemic and were also not considered to be casual or to have contributed to Bridget's death. However, the coroner found the failures by police caused distress to Bridget's close friends and family members and prompted hundreds of community members to go searching for Bridget in Melbourne parkland. Ms Giles said there was a perception – acknowledged at inquest by Assistant Victoria Police Commissioner Neil Paterson as "valid" — that the community was left to search for "one of their own". Coroner finds police failure to manage search increased suicide contagion risk While the coroner said she did not find that the "serious deficiencies" in police efforts were because Bridget was trans, they eroded trust within the community. It also put further community members at risk of suicide through exposure to Bridget's death. While police conducted a thorough internal review into Bridget's case, which recommended changes like taking into account LGBTQIA+ status when assessing risk and changing police systems to better capture gender identity, none of these changes have been actioned. Victoria Police said this was in part due to complexities with its very old IT system. Ms Giles said it was "troubling that no recommendations have been implemented several years on due to what is ostensibly an IT issue," and recommended Victoria Police complete its five internal recommendations "as a matter of priority." Bridget's sister, Angela Pucci Love, said there was a sense of "relief and vindication" hearing the finding there were failures from Victoria Police. "It is clear that more culturally appropriate support for the transgender and gender diverse community is necessary to ensure every person has the same rights and is treated with the same dignity," she said. Coroner recommends more resourcing for gender affirming care and community-led suicide prevention During the inquest, the coroner heard evidence about the positive impact that access to gender-affirming care can have on mental wellbeing as well as the significant barriers to accessing it currently in Victoria, in part driven by surging demand. She described significant waitlists at public gender clinics as "untenable for patients and healthcare providers alike" and recommended the state government health department consider urgently increasing resourcing to publicly funded health services delivering gender-affirming care. Ms Giles also recommended the introduction of mandatory LGBTQIA+ training for police, which includes training about the risks of suicide, and for similar training to made available to relevant health professionals, including general practitioners and psychiatrists, as well as coroners court staff. She also recommended ongoing funding for support services for the trans and gender diverse community, including initiatives for those at risk of suicide or who have been impacted by suicide. Angela Pucci Love, pictured outside the coroner's court on Thursday, has been an advocate for her sister Bridget Flack. ( AAP: Joel Carrett ) Another recommendation was that Victoria's attorney-general or law reform commission re-consider the way senior next-of-kin is identified, to reduce the hurdles it creates for the loved ones of those who die in reportable circumstances, such as suicide. The coroner acknowledged that recommendation followed the advocacy of Bridget Flack's sister, Angela Pucci Love. Speaking outside court, Ms Pucci Love said she hoped this would make the coronial process easier for families in future. "It's well known that especially a lot of members of trans and gender diverse community have fraught family relationships," she said. "We hear 'chosen family' often, and I don't know why chosen family can't be a more formal process." Transgender Victoria CEO Son Vivienne said the coroner's findings highlighted that trans lives were not valued or visible enough in current systems. Dr Vivienne welcomed the recommendations and said increasing access to culturally safe services would help save lives. "Many of [these recommendations] are long overdue, and none of them are impossible," they said. " Things like updating the police systems to accommodate gender diversity are absolutely possible. " Switchboard's suicide prevention manager Anna Bernasochi says her organisation will hold the government and police to account. ( ABC News: Danielle Bonica ) Switchboard Victoria is a LGBTQIA+ community organisation that runs a seven-day-a-week helpline and suicide prevention programs. Suicide prevention manager Anna Bernasochi said her organisation would be fighting to ensure the recommendations are implemented. "We're going to be there every step of the way to ensure that government, the police and other institutions are held to account so that we can change this reality for our communities." A Victorian government said the government would review the findings and recommendations made by the coroner. Share options Copy link Facebook X (formerly Twitter) See more ABC coverage in your search results Make ABC a preferred source in Google If you need someone to talk to, call: Lifeline on 13 11 14 Kids Helpline on 1800 551 800 MensLine Australia on 1300 789 978 Suicide Call Back Service on 1300 659 467 Beyond Blue on 1300 22 46 36 Headspace on 1800 650 890 QLife on 1800 184 527 Top Stories Rinehart allegedly tried to help recruit Liberal MP to join One Nation Topic: One Nation Men accused of planning terrorist attack at RAF base used to strike Iran Topic: Terrorism Banks cut rewards programs, free travel insurance amid surcharge ban Topic: Banking Migration cuts, AI and rising interest rates mean an era of long-term disinflation A Analysis by Alan Kohler Hundreds of Russian hybrid attacks serve to 'wake everyone up' in NATO Topic: Surveillance Related stories When Bridget went missing, hundreds rushed to find her. She won't be forgotten Topic: Mental Health Related topics Epidemics and Pandemics Gender Discrimination Health LGBTQIA+ Suicide VIC Top Stories Rinehart allegedly tried to help recruit Liberal MP to join One Nation Topic: One Nation Men accused of planning terrorist attack at RAF base used to strike Iran Topic: Terrorism Banks cut rewards programs, free travel insurance amid surcharge ban Topic: Banking Migration cuts, AI and rising interest rates mean an era of long-term disinflation A Analysis by Alan Kohler Hundreds of Russian hybrid attacks serve to 'wake everyone up' in NATO Topic: Surveillance Just In Young Arrernte boxer sets sights on Olympics after AIS opportunity Topic: Boxing Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:07am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:07am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:07am Treasurer to unveil $6 billion improvement to federal budget LIVE Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:02am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:02am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:02am Wall Street closes higher, ASX lacks direction ahead of rates decision LIVE Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:59am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:59am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:59am Police launch murder probe after death west of Brisbane Topic: Homicide Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:57am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:57am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:57am More Just In Back to top ABC News Contact ABC News Your home of Australian stories, conversations and events that shape our nation. This service may include material from Agence France-Presse (AFP), APTN, Reuters, AAP, CNN and the BBC World Service which is copyright and cannot be reproduced. Follow ABC News Sections ABC News Home Just In For You Watch Live News Live ABC NewsRadio Politics Elections Australia World Sport Live Sport Rural Business Analysis Science Health Lifestyle Entertainment Quizzes More Topics News in Language Chinese 中文 Tok Pisin Berita Bahasa Indonesia Related ABC News app Local News ABC Emergency ABC Indigenous ABC Religion & Ethics ABC Asia ABC Pacific Music & Audio ABC Listen Home triple j Live Radio Movies & TV ABC iview Home List of ABC Shows Live TV TV Guide Kids & Students BTN Education Heywire Takeover ABC Kids Get the ABC News AM newsletter Get the latest ABC News delivered to your email inbox Email address Subscribe Your information is being handled in accordance with the ABC Privacy Collection Statement . All ABC newsletters Stay informed and connected with the ABC. Covering a wide range of topics and brands including News, iview, listen, and more. Browse all ABC newsletters ABC home Information & Services Editorial Policies Accessibility Help Contact Us Commercial Careers About the ABC Privacy Policy Terms of Use © 2026 ABC Follow the ABC We acknowledge Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the First Australians and Traditional Custodians of the lands where we live, learn and work.