Israel | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Israel At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? No Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? No Legal Gender Recognition Possible? No LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? No Last Update: March 12, 2026 In Israel, some legal protections exist for LGBTIQ people. The country’s criminal code has not contained any provision criminalizing consensual same-sex sexual acts between adults since the 1988 amendment repealing Article 351, which penalized “carnal knowledge of any person against the order of nature.” The country offers protections against discrimination based on sexual orientation across different statutes, such as the Prohibition of Discrimination in Products, Services, and Entry into Places of Entertainment and Public Places Law (2000), the Patient Rights Law (as amended in 2004), and the Student Rights Law (as amended in 2014), which also outlaws discrimination on grounds of gender identity. Medical professionals are prohibited from carrying out conversion practices. While same-sex marriage is not legal in the country, since 2006, couples have been able to register their same-sex marriages celebrated abroad before the Israeli Population Registry. In 2018, the High Court of Justice affirmed the right to joint adoption of same-sex couples. Social stigma against LGBTIQ people remains, and LGBTIQ people still face family rejection, violence, and discrimination. For example, there have been reports of transgender people facing discrimination in health care settings. Advocacy groups reported a spike in anti-LGBTIQ violence and hate speech in Israel in 2022. Despite these developments, the government cut funding in 2024 for LGBTIQ tolerance programming in schools. In 2019, following the refusal of two billboard companies to show an ad, which was designed by a far-right party that linked gay people with child trafficking, an Israeli court ruled that billboard companies are not allowed to reject homophobic political advertisements. In late 2022, the coalition led by Benjamin Netanyahu, who allied himself with religious and anti-LGBTIQ far-right parties, won the elections. While Amir Ohana became the first openly gay Parliament speaker , certain members of the government are known for extreme anti-LGBTIQ rhetoric, which could jeopardize the status and rights acquired by LGBTIQ people in the country. Palestinian organizations and researchers have condemned Israel for engaging in “pinkwashing,” which they define as a strategy seeking to project an LGBTIQ-inclusive image internationally as a means to obscure the systematic oppression of Palestinians in the Occupied Palestinian Territory. While Israel is showing the world specific legal protections and visibility for LGBTIQ citizens, UN experts have found that it has committed genocide in Gaza , including causing one of the highest known death tolls among children, journalists, and health and humanitarian workers of any recent conflict in the world. Brutality is not limited to Gaza: dozens of arrests, imprisonments, and killings also occur in the West Bank . Queer Palestinians face extreme vulnerability due to social stigma, legal insecurity, and lack of access to basic services, rendering their lived realities starkly different from the liberal image Israel promotes abroad . Activists emphasize that meaningful queer liberation cannot be separated from broader struggles for justice, human rights, and equality for all people under occupation. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International