Equality Complaints Committee | Ísland.is Skip to main content Search Ísland.is Categories Life events Government agencies Categories Immigrating to Iceland Vehicles & driving Health Family & Social Welfare Education Wage Earners, Workplace Rights & Pensions Housing Finances & Taxes View all categories Life events Starting a Company Getting older Having a Baby Renting Getting sick Learning how to drive a car Moving Rights and obligations View all life events Government agencies Directorate of Labour Social Insurance Administration Iceland Health Directorate of Immigration Icelandic Transport Authority Landspitali - University Hospital The Icelandic police District commissioners View all government agencies Search Ísland.is IS Individuals Companies Login Individuals Companies Individuals Companies Login Individuals Companies IS Menu Search Ísland.is Categories Life events Government agencies Work, Employment & Pensions Service provider Directorate of Equality Ísland.is Work, Employment & Pensions Appeals & Complaints Work, Employment & Pensions Directorate of Equality Equality Complaints Committee Listen Individuals, companies, institutions and NGOs can refer cases to the Equality Complaints Committee if they believe the Equality Act has been violated, either on their own behalf or on behalf of their members. The process is straightforward, and in most cases there is no need for outside assistance. Advisors at the Directorate of Equality are always available to review cases and provide support if requested. The Committee reviews each case and issues a written ruling on whether a violation has occurred. Its rulings are binding, but the parties involved may still take the matter to court if they wish. More about the Equality Complaints Committee Rulings of the Committee (only in Icelandic) Have you experienced discrimination? Discrimination can appear in many ways, for example in hiring for a job or when accessing services. It can be difficult to assess whether discrimination has occurred, but advisors at the Directorate of Equality are ready to help. Contact an Advisor Laws and regulations Act on Equal Status and Equal Rights irrespective of Gender no. 150/2020 Act on Equal Treatment irrespective of Race and National Origins No. 85/2018 The Act on Equal Treatment in the Labor Market no. 86/2018 Service provider Dir­ect­or­ate of Equal­ity Directorate of Equality Address Borgum v/Norðurslóð 600 Akureyri Contact us jafnretti@jafnretti.is +354 460 6200 Opening hours mondays - thursdays 9-15 fridays 9-12 Stafrænt Ísland Þjónustuflokkar Stofnanir Persónuverndarstefna Íslenska