Unofficial translation

_______________________________________________________________________________

Opinion of 25 May 2021
of the Contrôleur général des lieux de privation de liberté
on the treatment of transgender persons in places of deprivation of liberty_______
_______________________________________________________________________
After an initial opinion published in the Journal officiel de la République francaise in 20101, the
Contrôleur général des lieux de privation de liberté (CGLPL) considers it necessary to express its views
once again on the situation of transgender*2 persons deprived of their liberty, given the persistence of
serious violations of their fundamental rights and the evolution of the legislative framework. This new
opinion covers all places of deprivation of liberty, all of which are concerned by this issue. Although
the CGLPL has never noted any violations of the fundamental rights of transgender persons in mental
health establishments, closed educational centres and juvenile detention centres, the violations
observed in other places are likely to occur there too. The recommendations contained in this opinion
can also to apply to intersex* or non-binary* persons.
To prepare this opinion, the CGLPL relied on the referrals received since 2010 concerning the
situation of some forty transgender persons, as well as on interviews with associations of transgender
persons and European experts. The observations of the Ministers of the Interior, Justice and Health
were sought. On-site and document inspections were organised3.
Finally, many of the difficulties encountered by transgender people deprived of their liberty
reveal the more general problems that the authorities are struggling to address: protecting vulnerable
persons without imposing additional constraints on them, such as the use of isolation, guaranteeing
the safety of persons in overcrowded or overly large establishments, preventing the risk of suicide by
acting not only on the immediate causes of the act but on their structural factors, thinking about mixing
genders in establishments in a context where the question of sexuality is rarely addressed other than
from the point of view of the risks of sexual assault. The purpose of this opinion is to provide
information that may help the authorities to reflect on these issues.

1

CGLPL, opinion of 30 June 2010 on the care and management of transsexual prisoners, published in the Journal
officiel de la République française of 25 July 2010.
2
Words marked with an asterisk are defined in a glossary attached to this opinion.
3
In the Fleury-Mérogis remand prison (men's prison and women's prison), the Caen prison, the Saint-Martin-deRé prison, the Toulouse-Seysses prison, and the Toulouse central police station. Eight transgender women and
one transgender man were interviewed, the files of several other people were examined and several dozen
professionals were interviewed. The reports on these on-site inspections are available on the CGLPL website.

1 CGLPL / Opinion on the care of transgender persons in places of deprivation of liberty

Unofficial translation

1. Understanding the specific challenges of transgender persons deprived of
their liberty in order to implement standards that respect their fundamental
rights
1.1. Conducting research on a population that is largely unknown today
The experiences of transgender people have been the subject of numerous scientific and
institutional studies showing that, due to the discrimination they face, they are over-represented
among the populations exposed to depression and self-harm, addiction and risk behaviours,
homelessness and deprivation of liberty measures.
In France, however, there is no public data4 on the number of transgender people deprived of
liberty by administrative or judicial decision, and studies on the particular challenges they face for their
transidentity* are incipient5. The public authorities therefore lack objective data enabling them to
effectively assess the measures to be put in place to protect transgender people.
The CGLPL recommends public authorities to finance and carry out research on the situation
of transgender persons deprived of their liberty in France. To this end, data collected in places of
deprivation of liberty could be usefully mobilised, in strict compliance with the principles governing
the protection of personal data.

1.2. Adapting the currently obsolete and contradictory legal framework
International and European standards are steadily moving towards greater recognition of
access to fundamental rights for transgender people. The World Health Organisation (WHO) removed
transidentity from the classification of mental disorders on 27 May 2019. In the more specific field of
deprivation of liberty, Principle 9 of the Yogyakarta6 Principles sets out seven obligations for those
responsible for detention (guaranteeing access to appropriate care, involving the person in their
assignment, staff training, etc.), while the United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment
of Prisoners, known as the Nelson Mandela Rules7, provide for self-determination in matters of gender
identity* during imprisonment. The European Court of Human Rights (ECHR) has ruled that respect for
gender identity, including when it differs from the assigned gender, is a component of respect for
human dignity and considers it "one of the essential foundations of self-determination"8. The European
Committee for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (CPT)
recommends the establishment of policies to combat the discrimination and exclusion faced by
4

Contrary to the recommendation formulated in the Ninth Annual Report of the UN Subcommittee on Prevention
of Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (SPT), CAT/C/57/4, § 75, p. 17, SPT,
2016.
5
La Haute Autorité de santé (High Authority on Health) thus underlined «l’invisibilisation, la sensation d’anormalité
et la stigmatisation, [ainsi que les] risques d’angles mort dans la prise en charge, sanitaire ou sociale» ( the invisibility,
the feeling of not being normal and the stigmatisation, [as well as the] risks of blind spots in health or social care)
to which transgender people deprived of their liberty are subjected . Sexe, genre et santé. Rapport d’analyse
prospective 2020 (Sex, gender and health. 2020 prospective analysis report), High Authority on Health, December
2020.
6
Yogyakarta Principles, Principles on the Application of International Human Rights Law in relation to Sexual
Orientation and Gender Identity, March 2007 - Principle 9 on human rights in detention. See also Additional
Principles and Additional State Obligations on the Application of International Human Rights Law in relation to
Sexual Orientation, Gender Identity, Gender Expression and Sex Characteristics to supplement the Yogyakarta
Principles, adopted 10 November 2017, Geneva.
7
United Nations Standard Minimum Rules for the Treatment of Prisoners (Nelson Mandela Rules), Rule 7.a,
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), 1955.
8
ECHR, 19 September 2003, Van Kück v. Germany (Appl. No. 35968/97), § 73.

2 CGLPL / Opinion on the care of transgender persons in places of deprivation of liberty

Unofficial translation
transgender prisoners and a comprehensive strategy to combat harassment9. The Association for the
Prevention of Torture (APT) has published a monitoring guide that outlines the state of the law and
provides guidance on how to protect the human rights of LGBTI+* persons deprived of their liberty10.
In France, since the law n° 2016-1547 of 18 November 2016 on the modernisation of justice in
the 21st century, the modification of the mention of gender in civil status is no longer subordinated to
a medical transition* and therefore to a modification of sexual characteristics through hormone
therapy and genital11 reassignment surgery*. Thus, a person with a penis can be registered as a woman
in civil status, just as a person with a vagina can be registered as a man. However, no normative
provision has been added to the provisions governing the treatment of persons deprived of their
liberty12. The procedures for searching or assigning persons whose civil status sex does not correspond
to their anatomical sex are not defined by the texts to date.
Within the Ministry of the Interior, the Directorate General of the National Police (DGPN)
introduced in 201813 the appointment and training of a 'racism, antisemitism, LGBT and discrimination'
focal point in each public security district and, in 2019, issued instructions to its services on the search
and accommodation of apprehended transgender persons14. The Directorate General of the National
Gendarmerie (DGGN) is currently drafting a memo on the reception of LGBTI+ persons. There are no
general instructions from the Minister of Justice, but work is underway at the Directorate of
Penitentiary Administration (DAP), based on a survey conducted in 201915. Furthermore, local
directorates can now call upon a focal point specialised in the care of transgender persons for
individual situations. The Minister of Health has not issued any directives other than the sheet on
transgender people in the methodological guide on health care for people in custody16. However, the
content of this sheet does not provide any medical advice on the care that can be provided to
transgender people. Health care staff are only invited to accompany them and refer them to external
professionals. However, these three ministries are committed to the 2020-2023 governmental action
plan for equal rights and against LGBT+ hate and discrimination.
With this uncertain legal framework and in the absence of national instructions17, the
management of places of deprivation of liberty face challenges in dealing with transgender people.
Although protocols have sometimes been formalised at local level, for example at the Caen prison,
they have not been validated by the hierarchical authorities or are not used anymore with the
departure of their authors. Other establishments use individual measures to respond to each of the
specific problems of the individuals, such as at the Saint-Martin-de-Ré prison, where a transgender
person was given permission to access the communal showers alone, without any other measures to
adapt her care.
9

Report on the visit to Malta (3-10 September 2015), CPT/Inf(2016)25, § 53, CPT, 2016.
Promoting the effective protection of LGBTI persons deprived of their liberty: a monitoring guide, APT, 2019.
11
As the latter often requires the prior agreement of a psychiatrist, this legislative change corresponds to a depsychiatrisation of the legal transition.
12
The terms "sex", "women" and "men" in the Code of Criminal Procedure are not defined (in particular in Articles
63-7, R. 57-6-18, R. 57-7-81 and D. 74 on assignment and searches).
13
Command Instruction of 17 December 2018 on the designation of racism, anti-Semitism, LGBT and
discrimination referents.
14
Telegram DGPN/CAB/N° 2019-289D of 24 January 2019 on the reception and care of LGBT persons within
police services.
15
Survey on the care arrangements for prisoners who are vulnerable because of their sexual orientation or
gender identity, to be carried out in July 2019 across all prisons.
16
Sheet 3 of Book 2 of the interministerial instruction n° DGS/SP/DGOS/DSS/DGCS/DAP/DPJJ/2017/345 of 19
December 2017 relating to the publication of the methodological guide relating to the health care of persons in
custody.
17
With the sole exception of those issued by the national police.
10

3 CGLPL / Opinion on the care of transgender persons in places of deprivation of liberty

Unofficial translation
Legislative and regulatory changes must be made as soon as possible to draw all the
consequences of the changes brought about by the law of 18 November 2016. New clear provisions
must be adopted to respect the gender identity of persons deprived of their liberty, accompanying
them in their transition process* and taking into account their specific needs. In the meantime,
administrations must issue instructions to guarantee the protection of the fundamental rights of
transgender persons. All these measures should be based on the recommendations made in this
opinion.
Focal points should be appointed and trained to inform and collect the views of those
concerned in a safe manner and to assist local management in their decision making.

1.3. Training professionals working in places of deprivation of liberty
Apart from the recent graduating classes of security and prison officers, few professionals have
been taught about transidentity during their initial or further training, although awareness of
discrimination is developing in the various schools.
The CGLPL found that staff in places of deprivation of liberty generally train themselves as best
they can, by conducting their own research. Good and bad practices are gradually perpetuated,
without taking into account legal developments and subsequent recommendations. Although staff
generally take a common sense approach and respect the rules, in reality the care they provide to
transgender people deprived of their liberty is often profoundly prejudicial to their fundamental rights.
This occurs in particular as a result of their assignment to a ward that does not correspond to their
self-identified gender*, the misgendering* that this entails, and the many difficulties they encounter
in the course of their transition. Furthermore, sometimes they face demeaning or even openly
transphobic acts or comments.
Moreover, these repeated attacks on the dignity and rights of transgender people can have
detrimental consequences for their mental health, even leading to suicide. Outside prison, transgender
people commit about nine times more suicide attempts and self-harm than the general population18,
especially when their transition has not started or is denied19. In addition, prisoners are seven times
more likely than free people to attempt suicide20. Thus, transgender people deprived of their liberty
are exposed to a particularly high risk of self-harm, which is even greater in the case of isolation.
However, this risk of suicide seems to be largely unknown or even ignored.
The initial training of professionals dealing with persons deprived of their liberty should
include in-depth modules on discrimination against gender minorities.
Staff in places of deprivation of liberty should have permanent access to up-to-date
information about the care of transgender persons, including through designated focal points,
ongoing training and the development of a regularly updated database.

18

The Report of the 2015 U.S. Transgender Survey, JAMES, S. E., HERMAN, J. L., RANKIN, S., KEISLING, M.,
MOTTET, L., & ANAFI, M., National Center for Transgender Equality (NTCE), Washington DC, 2016, p. 5.
19
"63% [of trans respondents] felt that they had resorted more to self-harm before they started transitioning,
and 3% more after they had transitioned", Trans Mental Health Study 2012, MCNEIL Jay, BAILEY Louis, ELLIS
Sonja, MORTON James, REGAN Maeve, Scottish Transgender Alliance, TransBareAll, the Trans Resource and
Empowerment Centre, Traverse Research, and Sheffield Hallam University, Sept. 2012, p. 55
20
For 2005-2010, the suicide rate was 18.5/10,000 for detainees and 2.7/10,000 for men aged 15 to 59 in the
general population of France (age group and gender equivalent to that of the detained population). Source:
Suicide des personnes écrouées en France: évolution et facteurs de risque (Suicide among prisoners in France:
trends and risk factors), DUTHE Géraldine, HAZARD Angélique, KENSEY Annie, Institut national d'études
démographiques, "Population" 2014/4, Vol. 69, pp. 519 to 549.

4 CGLPL / Opinion on the care of transgender persons in places of deprivation of liberty

Unofficial translation
Training for health care personnel should address the legal framework of medicalised
transitions*, hormone prescription and psychological support.
In addition, all professionals must be aware of the risk of self-harm to which transgender
people are particularly exposed, and trained on the structural prevention of suicide, particularly
through comprehensive care that respects gender identity. Finally, the voice of transgender people,
who are the primary experts on their situation and their needs, should be considered as a resource
that can be mobilised. Training could usefully be organised jointly with associations defending the
rights of transgender people.

2. Respecting the gender identity of persons deprived of their liberty on a daily basis
2.1. Consult transgender people on arrival to involve them in their care and not deny
their preferred title
When a transgender person arrives in a place of detention, there is no way for the
administration to identify their transidentity if there is no mention of it in their file or if the mismatch
between their physical appearance and the gender mentioned on their identity documents is not
obvious. Often, the transidentity is only revealed when they are asked to strip. Searches are sometimes
carried out for the sole purpose of establishing the person's sexual characteristics. This practice is a
serious violation of dignity.
Any person arriving in a place of deprivation of liberty should be invited to express any fears
they may have for their safety or dignity, particularly on the grounds of their gender identity. A
procedure should be formalised for this purpose and implemented in a caring and confidential
manner. Transgender persons should be free to disclose or not disclose their transidentity. Strip or
pat-down searches for the purpose of identifying anatomical sex should be prohibited.
As regards the services under the authority of the Ministry of the Interior, in the premises of
the gendarmerie, in the absence of other directives, persons are only placed in individual cells. The
Directorate General of the National Police (DGPN), in its telegram of 24 January 2019, gave instructions
to respect the title and first name under which the persons apprehended present themselves and to
include this information on the reports in addition to the information on the identity documents, after
obtaining the consent of the persons concerned. Their placement in an individual cell is also
encouraged. In practice, however, in the vast majority of cases, only civil status data are included in
the proceedings. Misgendering is frequent, including against people whose gender expression* is not
ambivalent. Unethical comments or acts are sometimes reported.
As regards arrival in premises under the authority of the Ministry of Justice, treatment is based
exclusively on civil status: choice of establishment or ward (male or female), entries in the registers
and detention procedures, gender used to address the person, etc. Only a few establishments proceed
differently (see below the practice implemented at Fleury-Mérogis remand prison).
When a transgender person is identified by the administration or the court, they shall be
placed in an individual cell upon arrival in a place of deprivation of liberty. The person should be
asked to indicate the title and first name by which they wish to be referred to verbally and in writing,
including in the proceedings and medical records, in addition to the information contained in the
civil status records. The preferences thus expressed should be respected and the person concerned
should be able to change them at any time. If the confinement is to be prolonged, the person
concerned should be received by a member of the management or staff for a more detailed
examination of their, and further and permanent measures should be decided upon.

5 CGLPL / Opinion on the care of transgender persons in places of deprivation of liberty

Unofficial translation
People arriving in a place of deprivation of liberty should be asked which categories of
professionals they wish to disclose their transidentity to, which should never be revealed without
their consent. Restrictions on access to this information should then be arranged.
All the information collected must be formally recorded before notifying the person
concerned and gathering their free and informed consent to the measures envisaged.

2.2. Adapting search procedures to respect the dignity of transgender persons
In the area of searches, scrupulous respect for ethical rules and dignity is particularly important
for transgender people as their life paths have often exposed them to discrimination and acts that
violate their dignity.
Articles 63-7 and R. 57-7-81 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provide that the search must
be carried out by an officer of the same sex as that of the person being searched, without further
specification.
In accordance with the instructions of the Directorate General of the National Police (DGPN),
the police in principle gives preference to the notion of gender over that of anatomical sex, so that
each person is searched in accordance with their gender21. However, compliance with this instruction
is uneven, whether in police custody, administrative detention centres or waiting areas. In the
gendarmerie, searches are carried out by an officer of the same sex as that shown on the civil status
documents of the person in custody22. A new memo is being drafted to allow a dialogue between the
officer and the person being searched and to ensure that physiological status prevails over civil status.
In case of disagreement, administrative identity will prevail.
The prison administration has not issued any instructions in this regard and, in the vast majority
of cases, the search is carried out by an officer of the same anatomical sex as the person being
searched, regardless of the person's registered sex or gender identity. In some institutions, the search
is even carried out by two officers so that a witness can testify to any inappropriate actions by the
other officer or the transgender person, which exacerbates the resulting violation of the latter's
dignity. Although male officers currently search transgender women* who already have developed
breasts, some directors refuse to allow female officers to search transgender women with male
genitalia. However, several female officers met by the CGLPL indicated that they would not be opposed
to performing such searches on a voluntary basis.
Some establishments are reducing the frequency of searches and are using magnetic sensors
rather than pat-downs.
The adaptation of search rules and practices to transgender persons does not constitute an
additional or exorbitant right, but simply the adaptation of the general principle of equal respect for
dignity to the particular situation of these persons. This must be translated into concrete measures to
ensure that the bodies exposed are viewed neutrally. The UN Special Rapporteur on Torture and Other
Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment considers that "full-body searches and the
humiliation they cause can constitute a form of torture or ill-treatment, particularly for transgender
detainees"23 and recommends that "all transgender detainees should be guaranteed the possibility to
choose to be searched by male or female staff"24.

21

Telegram DGPN/CAB/N° 2019-289D of 24 January 2019, op. cit.
Memo n° 060882 GEND/DOE/SDPJ/PJ of 27 June 2011 relating to the regime of measures and searches during
a police custody measure.
23
Report of the Special Rapporteur on torture and other cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment,
A/HRC/31/57, 5 January 2016, § 36.
24
Ibid, § 70 u).
22

6 CGLPL / Opinion on the care of transgender persons in places of deprivation of liberty

Unofficial translation
The decision to search transgender persons or any other person "must be necessary in view
of its objectives and proportionate to the individualised risks". Its practical arrangements must be
implemented gradually and "always preserve the dignity and fundamental rights of the persons
concerned"25.
Thus, the use of the over-the-clothes magnetic sensor, which is less intrusive and likely to be
used by both male and female officers, should be preferred to any other search method.
During full body searches, any request from the person concerned that limits the invasion of
privacy without hindering the search (e.g. hiding the chest or sex with the hands, undressing in two
stages, etc.) must be granted.
In any case, upon arrival in a place of deprivation of liberty, transgender persons should be
invited to express their preference as to the gender of the officers by whom they will be searched
through a systematic and formalised interview, the minutes of which should be notified to them.
Their wishes, which they should be able to revoke at any time, should be respected.

2.3. Respecting the placement wishes of transgender people and allowing free gender
expression
The conditions in places of deprivation of liberty are conducive to discrimination and violence.
Transgender people are a particular target26. Therefore, in places where accommodation is not mixed,
the question of whether they should be placed in male or female accommodation is of paramount
importance. Furthermore, it marks the recognition - or too often the denial - of their gender identity
and affects their daily life (access to activities, showers, certain objects or products commonly
associated with one gender such as bras, etc.).
Faced with the challenges of placement, many professionals wonder at what stage a person
should be considered transgender and receive special care. However, transidentity is a selfdetermination process, which is not systematically accompanied by physical transformations or a
change in civil status. Any transgender person who identifies as a woman is a woman and must be
recognised as such. Any transgender person who identifies as a man is a man and must be recognised
as such as well.
In administrative detention centres and facilities, while the placement of transgender people
in the area corresponding to their anatomical sex or in a segregation room has long been the norm,
they are now generally assigned to the area corresponding to their gender or to "family" areas.
In prisons, where the standards provide that "men and women are incarcerated in separate
establishments or in separate quarters of the same establishment"27, the majority of placements are
determined on the basis of the sex recorded in the civil status register, although some directors rely
instead on anatomical sex, as in the Fleury-Mérogis remand prison. Neither of these practices is fully
satisfactory. The first ignores the situation of people who have not changed their civil status or who do
not wish to or cannot take such a step, particularly those of foreign nationality. The second ignores the
situation of people who have not yet undergone gender reassignment surgery* or do not wish to do
25

Les Recommandations minimales du CGLPL pour le respect de la dignité et des droits fondamentaux des personnes
privées de liberté (The CGLPL's Minimum Recommendations for the Respect of the Dignity and Fundamental

Rights of Persons Deprived of Liberty, Recommendation No. 213.
26
"The risk of being sexually assaulted by prison officers was more than five times higher for transgender people
than for the rest of the U.S. prison population, and more than nine times higher for sexual assault by fellow
inmates', The Report of the 2015 U.S. Transgender Survey, op. cit. , p. 15.
27
Article 1 of the standard internal regulations for prisons annexed to Article R. 57-6-18 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure.

7 CGLPL / Opinion on the care of transgender persons in places of deprivation of liberty

Unofficial translation
so. Finally, only transgender people who have undergone a change of civil status and genital
reassignment surgery are guaranteed to be assigned to a sector that conforms to their gender.
The vast majority of transgender people are incarcerated in institutions or wards that do not
correspond to their gender identity. The prison administration tries to protect them from the risk of
aggression by taking measures that make them invisible.
Firstly, they are frequently placed in isolation or in particular areas (e.g. nurseries) when there
are no other people or not used much, which reduces or eliminates their possibilities for human
contact and access to work, physical activity, appropriate care, etc. This situation can lead to a
deterioration in their psychological health, or even to suicide.
Secondly, there is a specific ward for transgender people at the Fleury-Mérogis men's prison.
Located on the floor of the solitary confinement area, it follows the same rules as the solitary
confinement area, which is designed to keep the prisoners away from the eyes of others (walking in a
small screened courtyard on the floor, moving around in areas emptied of other prisoners, etc.).
Such a regime certainly prevents the risk of aggression but compromises the effectiveness of
many other fundamental rights. Moreover, given its unique nature in France, people from all over the
country may be placed there. This can be detrimental to the maintenance of family ties. In any case, it
is a discriminatory and segregative practice.
Thirdly, transgender persons are assigned to ordinary detention but their ability to express
themselves in their gender is then restricted or even annihilated (in male institutions, prohibition to
wear so-called female clothing for example). In addition, the preservation of their security is almost
exclusively their responsibility (not going to the communal showers and washing at the cell sink,
befriending influential people in detention, etc.) and this may even lead some of them to have sexual
relations with fellow inmates who could protect them.
In these three situations, access to and use of accessories and products commonly associated
with one gender or the other are difficult because they are conditioned by the sector of assignment.
Thus, objects considered to be feminine (dresses, bras, jewellery, make-up, etc.) are most often
prohibited in men's prisons. They are then withdrawn during the inventory on arrival, prohibited from
being handed over during visits to the visiting room and absent from canteen catalogues. Sometimes,
they are admitted to the cell, with express authorisation and under certain conditions (discretion of
clothing, medical transition, altered civil status, etc.). The rules thus established by the heads of prisons
and their application evolve according to requests, the officers on duty and what they consider to be
common sense in terms of equal treatment of prisoners. However, taking into account a specific basic
need does not constitute a breach of equality but, on the contrary, it guarantees it. In this regard, the
Nelson Mandela Rules state: "In order to give effect to the principle of non-discrimination, the prison
administration shall take into account the needs of each prisoner, in particular those of the most
vulnerable categories in the prison environment. Measures required to protect and promote the rights
of prisoners with special needs shall be taken and shall not be considered discriminatory”28. These
situations are the cause of serious violations of the dignity, privacy and physical and psychological
integrity of the persons concerned. Having their identity denied, they are particularly exposed to the
risk of self-harm.
Transgender persons deprived of their liberty should not be isolated solely on the basis of
their transidentity, unless it is a brief measure of last resort and an emergency.
Like any other person who may be particularly vulnerable to violence in places of deprivation
of liberty, transgender persons may be subject to special care. As such, they should be able to be
allocated to a vulnerable area if they so request, or following an assessment of the risks to which
28

Rule 2.2 of the Nelson Mandela Rules, op. cit.

8 CGLPL / Opinion on the care of transgender persons in places of deprivation of liberty

Unofficial translation
they are individually exposed in the ordinary sector. Transidentity alone should not lead to
automatic placement in a secure unit. Within the protected area, they should not be subject to
separation measures other than those strictly necessary to improve the quality of their care and
should be able to participate in common activities.
Transgender persons should be free to keep or acquire objects and accessories commonly
associated with the gender with which they identify. Prohibitions in this area should only be justified
on the basis of detailed security requirements and should be subject to an adversarial discussion and
a reasoned, notified and appealable decision, and alternatives should be offered. In addition, it
would be useful to have joint shopping catalogues for men's and women's wards.
Currently, prison authorities are reluctant to assign a person to their self-identified gender
when they have a physical appearance or genital characteristics of the opposite gender and most often
refuse, for example, to assign a transgender man to the men's group if he has a vagina.
Firstly, the risk of physical assault was mentioned, with management fearing that transgender
women, who are sometimes described as imposing in size and voice, would attack staff or other
women in prison. Risks of sexual assault were also highlighted, with transgender people alternately
described as potential aggressors or victims. However, it is the responsibility of the administration to
guarantee the safety of any person in a vulnerable situation, without affecting the protection of their
other fundamental rights. The CGLPL refers here to its thematic report on interpersonal violence in
places of deprivation of liberty, which recommends the implementation of an effective policy to
combat verbal, physical or sexual violence29.
Risks of pregnancy are then put forward. However, persons deprived of their liberty retain the
right to freely dispose of their bodies and, in this respect, to have free and consensual sexuality and to
have a child if they so wish. It is the responsibility of the administration to organise preventive actions
in sexual and reproductive health, and to improve access to contraception and voluntary termination
of pregnancy.
The CGLPL recalls that the absence of steps to change civil status or physical modifications does
not call into question a person's transidentity. There are therefore no transitional conditions necessary
for assignment to the self-identified gender area. The only criterion to be taken into account is the selfdetermination of the person concerned.
The assignment of transgender persons should be subject to an adversarial procedure.
Individuals should therefore be systematically consulted about their wishes to be assigned
to a male or female sector. To this end, they must be informed of the protective measures that can
be deployed in the event that they feel unsafe there. Their request must be granted, except in
exceptional and justified cases (which excludes organisational and architectural constraints). The
decision on the assignment must then be notified and subject to appeal.
Transgender people should be able to request a review of their situation at any time.
Exclusion from the selected area should only be considered if it is established that the
original request was abusive. Changes between male and female wings should be based only on
gender identity and never on disciplinary or internal order grounds.
If incidents occur despite the observance of these principles, the personal responsibility of
the authorities staff cannot be engaged more than for any other incident.

29

CGLPL, Les violences interpersonnelles dans les lieux de privation de liberté (Interpersonal violence in places of
deprivation of liberty), Dalloz, 2020.

9 CGLPL / Opinion on the care of transgender persons in places of deprivation of liberty

Unofficial translation

3. Supporting transgender people who wish to change their civil status
While the easing of the rules for obtaining a change of first name or sex at the civil status office
since 18 November 2016 has broadened the spectrum of people who can claim administrative
recognition of their gender, some remain excluded de jure (people of foreign nationality) or de facto
(those who do not have access to information, do not have the necessary codes or resources to carry
out these procedures, do not consider them a priority in relation to other concerns, have given up on
asserting their rights, etc.). The deprivation of liberty measure, insofar as it is supposed to be
accompanied by social, legal and administrative support that is sometimes lacking for people on the
outside, can be a particularly opportune moment for those who wish to do so to apply for a change of
first name or sex at the civil registry, particularly with a view to facilitating their return to freedom.
However, due to a lack of training, the prison integration and probation services do not always consider
themselves competent to support people in their application to change their civil status. The persons
concerned must therefore often carry out these procedures themselves or seek the services of a
lawyer, which entails a financial cost.
In addition, the testimonies gathered by the CGLPL show that the civil registrars or magistrates
responsible for processing these applications sometimes require the persons concerned to produce,
as proof of life in the gender of destination, elements that they are unable to provide from a place of
deprivation of liberty, particularly because of the measures of separation and invisibilisation taken by
the authorities against them (testimonies attesting to their gender expression, for example).
Transgender persons deprived of their liberty who wish to make a legal transition* should
be accompanied within the institutions by properly trained staff. They should have access to the
contact details of associations working for the rights of LGBTI+ persons whose interventions should
be encouraged. A telephone hotline for LGBTI+ people should also be available to them free of
charge at all times.
In order to facilitate the legal transition and therefore the respect of the right to selfdetermination and privacy of transgender persons, the CGLPL recalls the framework decision No.
2020-136 of 18 June 2020 of the Defender of Rights, which recommends that such steps may be
taken by means of a simple declaration on honour. In the meantime, the administrative and judicial
authorities examining applications for a change of first name and gender in civil status from persons
deprived of their liberty must be informed of the restrictions imposed on them on a daily basis and
take into account the resulting difficulties in proving their transidentity.
The competent services and actors in places of deprivation of liberty must accompany
transgender persons of foreign nationality who wish to initiate a legal transition with the authorities
of their country of origin. If they have fled their country of origin because of their transidentity and
are in France illegally, they should be informed of the possibility of seeking protection from the
French Office for the Protection of Refugees and Stateless Persons (OFPRA) and be accompanied in
doing so.

4. Ensuring appropriate health care for transgender people and enabling a medical
transition
4.1. Ensuring access to appropriate care for transgender people
Access to care and the quality of health care in places of deprivation of liberty must be
equivalent to that outside. However, the binary organisation of assignments and the frequent use of

10 CGLPL / Opinion on the care of transgender persons in places of deprivation of liberty

Unofficial translation
isolation for transgender people deprived of their liberty hinder their effective access to care: limited30
psychotherapeutic follow-up because the practitioners cannot receive the person in their office as they
usually do and must travel to the isolation ward; refusal of assignment to a regional medicopsychological service because of the impossibility of organising isolated management there; reduced
access to necessary specialised consultations, for example gynaecological consultations from a "men's"
ward for transgender men* who have not undergone phalloplasty or for transgender women who have
undergone vaginoplasty, etc.
In addition, many health care personnel working in places of deprivation of liberty claim that
they do not provide special care for transgender people on the grounds that care should be seen as
that of an individual and not a group. This approach is based on the desire to guarantee identical care
to all patients. However, such equal treatment is only effective if it is accompanied by a detailed
knowledge of the medical data and needs of transgender31 people. Despite the lack of training, carers
are often aware of the overexposure of transgender people to sexually transmittedinfections32. On the
other hand, they are unaware, for example, that some patients have given up care in favour of selfmedication, including hormonal medication, due to the lack of consideration for their gender identity
by the medical profession outside the hospital. Moreover, the majority of doctors interviewed by the
CGLPL spoke of the transgender people they were treating by referring to their civil status gender and
not their self-identified gender, thus using the masculine form to refer to female patients. Such a
misgendering questions the knowledge and positioning of these doctors regarding the needs of their
transgender patients.
Transgender persons deprived of their liberty must have effective and consistent access to
care that is appropriate to their needs. To this end, health care providers must provide a safe
environment, which includes recognising and respecting the gender identity of their patients.
Prevention and screening for diseases to which transgender people are likely to have been
exposed as a result of their life course or medical transition (infectious diseases, cancers, etc.) should
be encouraged. Psychological support should also be offered and, if necessary, special attention
should be paid to the effects of daily confrontation with transphobia.

4.2. Enabling continuity and commitment to medical transition
Just as treatment breaks are often experienced by people arriving in a place of deprivation of
liberty, transgender people often do not benefit immediately from the continuation of their hormone
treatment or post-operative follow-up. From a few hours in police custody to several weeks in
administrative detention centres and prisons, these delays are cumulative as people move from one
place of detention to another.
This is particularly the case if they do not carry their medication or a prescription in French.
When the deprivation of liberty is to last, some doctors agree to continue the hormone therapy or try
30

Although transidentity does not obviously calls for psychotherapeutic treatment in itself, confinement can be
a source of psychological suffering, particularly when it is accompanied by segregation measures. The CGLPL is
particularly attentive to the issue of access to psychotherapeutic care for isolated persons in general.
31
"When discussing health inequalities for transgender people, health care providers often refer to the idea of
"treating all patients the same". In reality, this approach is problematic because it ignores the uniqueness of the
person, overlooks the importance of individual factors and characteristics on outcomes, and contradicts the
person-centred view of care. Clinically, this affects the patient-provider relationship, with consequences for
treatment adherence, and can lead to failure to detect certain diseases such as cancer. It is not surprising in these
circumstances that less than 40% of transgender people report that their doctor knows their gender identity",
Sex, Gender and Health, Haute autorité de santé, 2020, p. 151.
32
"The rate of HIV-positive diagnoses was 1.4% for respondents, a rate substantially higher than that of the U.S.
population (0.3%)" (CGLPL translation), The Report of the 2015 U.S. Transgender Survey, op. cit. , p. 120.

11 CGLPL / Opinion on the care of transgender persons in places of deprivation of liberty

Unofficial translation
to contact the prescribing doctor outside in order to obtain a copy of the prescription, which is a good
practice. Continuation of hormone therapy is sometimes conditional on an initial endocrinology
consultation or further tests (MRI, blood tests, etc.), which may take several weeks or months.
However, an abrupt and prolonged interruption of hormonal treatment is likely to have
detrimental somatic effects on the organism and to induce the reappearance of physical signs linked
to the gender assigned at birth (pilosity, vocal moult, etc.), which may lead to psychological suffering.
Medical visits should be arranged on arrival in places of deprivation of liberty and
transgender persons should be asked about any needs related to their medical transition. If postoperative treatment or care was underway before deprivation of liberty, it should be continued
without delay. If a consultation with a specialist is necessary, it should take place as soon as possible.
At present, in long-stay facilities, it is difficult to continue a hormone treatment that has
already been started, and almost impossible to initiate and complete a medical transition, partly
because of the reluctance of doctors.
Firstly, doctors in health units often have no medical or legal knowledge of medical transitions.
Due to a lack of training and sometimes not knowing where to get information, they are unable to
inform people who ask them about medical transitions and find it difficult to refer them. In addition,
they feel incompetent to prescribe hormone treatments and do not believe they are authorised to do
so. However, while some procedures can only be carried out by specialist doctors, others, such as
prescribing feminising hormones, can be carried out by general practitioners working in places of
detention.
In addition, many doctors working in health units justify their refusal to prescribe hormonal
treatment by invoking the medium- and long-term health risks for patients (psychiatric and
cardiovascular problems, etc.). However, the World Professional Association for Transgender Health
warns that "the consequences of interrupting treatment or not starting medically necessary treatment
can be very negative, leading to self-castration, depression and suicidal risks"33, to which can be added
the taking of hormones through indirect channels (trafficking, prostitution) and without medical
follow-up, and invites to reflect in terms of risk reduction.
Furthermore, most doctors believe that the commitment to a medical transition must
necessarily be part of the strict protocol set up by a dozen multidisciplinary hospital teams specialising
in transidentity. However, the CGLPL notes that such a protocol, which imposes a two-year psychiatric
follow-up prior to any hormonal prescription, is not imposed by national regulations or WHO
recommendations. It is contested by many experts from civil society, who advocate free choice of
doctor and treatment. In addition, some specialist teams do not cover the full range of disciplines
required for certain transitional pathways, for example those involving genital reassignment. It has
been observed that prisoners compromise their family ties by requesting to be transferred to facilities
close to these hospitals in the hope of receiving care that is not in fact provided there.
Secondly, some health professionals question the transidentity of their patients. Several
doctors interviewed in the course of preparing this opinion indicated that the refusal of some
transgender people to undergo gender reassignment surgery is a sign that their transidentity is not a
given. Others give limited credit to requests from transgender patients incarcerated for sexual
offences, believing that they cannot be truly transgender.
Thirdly, some doctors expressed reservations about initiating a transition during incarceration
on the grounds that deprivation of liberty would affect the ability of the individuals concerned to make
free and informed choices and that institutions would not be suitable places to do this. Others fear
33

Standards of Care (SOC) for transgender, transsexual and gender non-conforming health, The World
Professional Association for Transgender Health (WPATH), 7th version, September 2013, p. 76.

12 CGLPL / Opinion on the care of transgender persons in places of deprivation of liberty

Unofficial translation
that their patients will start a treatment that may not be continued upon release, which would be
harmful to their health. However, for some people, detention can be an opportune time to benefit
from health and social support, which they sometimes lack on the outside, and to set up long-term
monitoring, as one of them told the CGLPL, even though she had been waiting for a medical transition
for years.
While in the open enviroment, transgender people facing similar attitudes can turn to other
medical teams, transgender people deprived of liberty are de facto deprived of this resource. This
situation can result in an undue infringement of their fundamental rights, including their rights to selfdetermination, free disposal of their bodies, access to care and respect for their physical and
psychological integrity.
Transgender persons deprived of their liberty who wish to pursue or initiate a medical
transition should be informed and accompanied in their efforts by the health care staff of the
institutions. They should be given prompt treatment in accordance with their needs and wishes by
doctors who are duly trained for this purpose. The appropriateness of prescriptions must be
regularly re-evaluated in the light of medical check-ups, adverse effects observed and the requests
of the persons concerned. Refusal to prescribe can only be justified by an individualised assessment
that transitional care is medically impossible.
The right to free choice of doctor must be respected. To this end, referral to multidisciplinary
hospital teams specialising in transidentity can only be offered on the same basis as other care
modalities and after people have been informed of the possibilities offered by each system (time
limits, accessible care pathways, prerequisites, etc.) and then given the opportunity to freely express
their choice. In addition, the involvement of experts from civil society and access to information,
particularly through websites dedicated to medical transition, should be encouraged.
Finally, in addition to the reluctance of doctors, there are difficulties arising from the
organisation of places of deprivation of liberty, which also hinder access to specialised care for
transgender people wishing to start or continue a medical transition. Indeed, many specialised
consultations are not available in places of deprivation of liberty and require medical tranfers.
However, in a context where delays in obtaining a medical appointment are several months, these
transfers are extremely difficult or even impossible to organise from certain establishments, due to
the lack of vehicles and escorts available in sufficient numbers. Specialised doctors sometimes refuse
to take charge of detained patients because of these difficulties and the constraints inherent in
conducting consultations (presence of officers, including during psychiatric interviews).
Furthermore, surgical operations often require extensive post-operative care and regular
follow-up, which cannot be provided in detention. Caregivers generally consider it preferable for the
persons concerned to wait until they have been released to benefit from them, even if they have been
sentenced to several years in detention.
The CGLPL reiterates its general recommendation to substantially improve access to
specialised care for persons deprived of their liberty, to respect medical secrecy and to significantly
increase the capacity for medical extractions. Organisational difficulties within the administration
should not hinder the medical transition of transgender persons.
*
**
Currently, transgender persons deprived of their liberty suffer numerous human rights
violations, the accumulation of which may constitute cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment within
the meaning of the European Convention on Human Rights.

13 CGLPL / Opinion on the care of transgender persons in places of deprivation of liberty

Unofficial translation
The recommendations in this opinion aim to ensure full respect for the dignity and rights of
transgender people deprived of their liberty, in particular their rights to self-determination, free
disposal of their bodies, access to health care, intimacy and privacy. Their application would also make
it possible to respond to an essential issue: the preservation of the physical and psychological integrity
of these people, understood from the angle of interpersonal violence but also from the angle, often
neglected, of the risks of self-harm.
If a transgender person cannot be provided with care that respects their dignity, identity,
privacy, intimacy and safety, or if they are prevented from continuing or initiating a desired medical
transition, alternatives to deprivation of liberty, temporary release or release from prison should be
considered.

GLOSSARY
Gender expression: the set of visible characteristics that can be associated with gender, whether in
terms of behaviour or physical appearance (clothing, jewellery, make-up, haircut, etc.).
Transgender woman: a person who has been assigned male at birth due to her anatomical
characteristics and whose gender identity is female.
Self-identified gender: a person's perceived gender, which may differ from that associated with their
civil status or physical appearance.
Transgender man: a person who was assigned female at birth due to his anatomical characteristics
and whose gender identity is male.
Gender identity: the intimate and personal experience of gender by a person, regardless of the sex
assigned at birth.
Misgendering: the practice of referring to and using the lexical field of the sex assigned to a person at
birth, ignoring the self-identified gender (e.g. saying 'sir' to a transgender woman).
LGBTI+ people: lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, intersex and other sexual and gender minorities.
Intersex person: a person who is born with variations in sex development, whether genetic, hormonal
or anatomical, and therefore has characteristics considered both male and female.
Non-binary person: a person who does not identify with the gender duality of men and women.
Transgender person: a person whose gender identity does not correspond to the sex assigned to them
at birth. A transgender person may or may not have taken steps to change their civil status or undergo
physical transformations. The terms "transsexual" and "transsexualism", used by the CGLPL in its 2010
opinion, should be replaced by "transgender" and "transidentity", as they correspond more closely to
the reality of the situation and to the vocabulary used by the majority of the people concerned today.
Genital or sexual reassignment: surgery to reconstruct the genitalia to conform to the self-identified
gender (vaginoplasty, phalloplasty).
Transidentity: having a gender identity that does not correspond to the sex assigned at birth.
Transition: steps to bring gender identity and expression in line with the deeply held sense of gender.
These steps can be social, legal or medical.
Legal transition: a process aimed at obtaining a change in the first name or gender in civil status.
Medical transition: all procedures that aim to modify, in a reversible or definitive way, the physical
characteristics in order to acquire those attached to the gender of destination (taking hormones, voice
modification thanks to a follow-up by a phoniatrist, surgery: mastectomy, mammoplasty, removal of
the Adam's apple, phalloplasty, vaginoplasty, etc.). Recourse to one, several or none of these
procedures does not condition transidentity and is a free choice of the person.
14 CGLPL / Opinion on the care of transgender persons in places of deprivation of liberty

Unofficial translation
Social transition: adopting a gender expression that does not correspond to that associated with the
sex assigned at birth.

15 CGLPL / Opinion on the care of transgender persons in places of deprivation of liberty