French Polynesia reflects on LGBTQIA+ rights, place in society | RNZ Skip to main content News Life News Life Radio Podcasts Video Sections Search all of RNZ Rapua News Pitopito kōrero Show Hide Politics World Business Personal finance Sport Crime / Justice Health Education Environment Science / Tech Emergencies Community Regions Country Weather Te Ao Māori Pacific IndoNZ 中文 News Pitopito kōrero Show Hide Politics World Business Personal finance Sport Crime / Justice Health Education Environment Science / Tech Emergencies Community Regions Country Weather Te Ao Māori Pacific IndoNZ 中文 Life Tauoranga Show Hide Browse all Screens Books Culture Music Food Wellbeing Lifestyle Relationships People Life Tauoranga Show Hide Browse all Screens Books Culture Music Food Wellbeing Lifestyle Relationships People Radio Irirangi Show Hide RNZ National RNZ Concert RNZ Pacific Parliament More ways to listen Radio Irirangi Show Hide RNZ National RNZ Concert RNZ Pacific Parliament More ways to listen Podcasts Kōnae ipurangi Video Ataata Storytime Puna tamariki News sections Show Hide Politics World Business Personal finance Sport Crime / Justice Health Education Environment Science / Tech Emergencies Community Regions Country Weather Te Ao Māori Pacific IndoNZ 中文 News sections Show Hide Politics World Business Personal finance Sport Crime / Justice Health Education Environment Science / Tech Emergencies Community Regions Country Weather Te Ao Māori Pacific IndoNZ 中文 Follow the news Show Hide Sign up for our Daily Newsletter Subscribe to RNZ News with RSS Get the RNZ App Facebook Instagram YouTube TikTok Follow the news Show Hide Sign up for our Daily Newsletter Subscribe to RNZ News with RSS Get the RNZ App Facebook Instagram YouTube TikTok Listen to the news Show Hide RNZ National RNZ Pacific Parliament More ways to listen Listen to the news Show Hide RNZ National RNZ Pacific Parliament More ways to listen World Politics Crime / Justice Business Sport Health Education Environment Community Country Weather Te Ao Māori Pacific IndoNZ 中文 RNZ / News / Pacific Link: https://www.rnz.co.nz/news/eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiJ9._g.pKhUMkRnoOZwX4iq2fhLAqba5Rz0jb3mINKRqASmxf0/pacific/504542%2Ffrench-polynesia-reflects-on-lgbtqia-rights-place-in-society News Pacific 12 December 2023, 2:13pm French Polynesia reflects on LGBTQIA+ rights, place in society Patrick Decloitre Caption: O'omaka Gendron (centre) elected Miss T 2023. Photo credit: Polynésie la 1ère French Polynesia has held for the first time a series of consultations and panel discussions dedicated to the rights of the local LGBTQIA+ community and its place in the local and Pacific society. The international colloquium, themed "Our voices, our rights, our Pacific Way", took place on 7 and 8 November and was hosted by the University of French Polynesia, in the capital Papeete. Some of the discussions focused on the respect of the rights of the LGBTQIA+ (lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans-gender, queer, inter-sex and asexual) community and its acceptance and inclusion within the local and regional societies. Some of the presentations came from sociologists, researchers, and representatives of local churches (Catholic, Protestant amongst others) and from the local government (namely French Polynesia's Vice-President, Mrs Éliane Tevahitua and from the local Territorial Assembly). Representatives from foreign LGBTQI+ communities and NGOs came from New Zealand, Australia, Samoa, Fiji and Kiribati. During the two-day conference, some of the presentations, debates and panellists recalled that in Polynesia at large, the concept of trans-gender and "third gender" was a well-entrenched and accepted part of the society, a cultural factor well recognised in Samoa (with the Faʻafafine) and French Polynesia (Rae-rae). On that basis, invoking the "Pacific Way", participants agreed to pursue in their efforts to carry a message of tolerance so that such issues as gender, homosexuality, trans-gender, are no longer stigmatised in future. They also acknowledged that French Polynesia's new government, soon after coming to power, has flown the rainbow flag at its headquarters to mark World Day against homophobia, transphobia and biphobia on 17 May 2023. After the meeting, one of the objectives was to synthesise the views exchanged during this forum to draft a kind of LGBTQIA+ policy roadmap for local authorities. In neighbouring Cook Islands, homosexuality was decriminalised only recently, in mid-April 2023, when the half-a-century-old Crimes Act was amended by a vote in Parliament. The law - which has never been enforced -, provisioned in its original version that the offence of "indecent acts between males" was punishable by up to five years in prison. In half a dozen other Pacific island countries, similar stigmatising laws are still in force. Lalita, a transgender person, speaks during a round table involving French Polynesia’s churches. University of French Polynesia Attempt to fully reimburse hormonal treatment After the meeting, French Polynesia's Vice-President Éliane Tevahitua said her government was working on a Bill for social security to fully reimburse (like in mainland France) hormonal treatment (progesterone or testosterone) for trans-gender persons. A few days later, once tabled, the Bill caused heated debates in French Polynesia's Territorial Assembly and to date, has failed to gain sufficient support. During heated debates, several MPs expressed the view that while they understood the motivations behind this Bill, they did not consider it a priority at this stage and that in terms of medical expenses, the focus should be more on assisting persons suffering from diabetes or cancer. "I think at one point or another, as a society, we cannot elude this issue forever. There are members of our society who have this particular gender identity and who sometimes have to resort to surgery to make their transition a reality. So the question is: do we leave them to deal with this on their own? And do we take the risk this involves for their health? Or are we showing some kind of solidarity just like we do with persons in a situation of obesity and who have to resort to surgery?", French Polynesia's President Moetai Brotherson told local media in the wake of the Assembly's stormy exchanges. Participants at a round table during the two-day colloquium on LGBTQIA+ at the University of French Polynesia. University of French Polynesia Miss T 2023 crowned Incidentally, late October, just a few days before the LGBTQIA+ conference, 25-year-old O'omaka Gendron, a trans-gender makeup artist from the Marquesas Islands, was crowned Miss T 2023. She was elected among six other contestants vying for the title. It was the first time this pageant, dedicated to trans-gender beauty, was held in a public place in the capital Papeete around the theme "The Olympian Goddesses". "I think this is an enormous step for the future of the trans-gender community (...) We all hope this will continue in the years to come", the newly-crowned Miss told local public broadcaster Pölynésie la Première. The new Queen now qualifies to represent French Polynesia at the "Miss T France" pageant in March 2024. News Pacific 12 December 2023, 2:13pm Print Related stories Hundreds of people affected after torrential rain and flooding in French Polynesia Paris Olympic organisers seek solution over Tahiti surf break Ngā Pitopito Kōrero RNZ's daily newsletter Sign up for Ngā Pitopito Kōrero , a daily newsletter curated by our editors and delivered straight to your inbox. More Pacific View all Pacific articles Vanuatu signs declaration to give children and youth greater voice on climate Fijiana finish WXV Global Series Challenger unbeaten Oceania Rugby says no money to host Oceania Sevens Cup in Rotorua 'They just have to get out': Civilians pay the price for West Papua conflict More News View RNZ homepage Ministry delays rules on too-hot homes Germany’s AfD is so extreme it’s putting off other far-right parties Explainer: Can you get arrested for vandalising a campaign sign? 'She's a miracle': the Northland nana who got off meth Ngā Pitopito Kōrero RNZ's daily newsletter Sign up for Ngā Pitopito Kōrero , a daily newsletter curated by our editors and delivered straight to your inbox. © RNZ, original at https://www.rnz.co.nz/news/eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiJ9._g.pKhUMkRnoOZwX4iq2fhLAqba5Rz0jb3mINKRqASmxf0/pacific/504542%2Ffrench-polynesia-reflects-on-lgbtqia-rights-place-in-society Footer navigation RNZ Stations National Concert RNZ Pacific Parliament - live stream On demand Latest on demand radio Latest podcasts Latest video How to watch & listen Audio help Radio Follow our podcasts Sky, Freeview & Satellite YouTube RNZ apps for iPhone and Android RNZ Flash Briefing for Amazon Alexa RNZ News for Google Assistant About RNZ About Contact Audience Feedback and Complaints Media Releases Awards Jobs Join RNZ Research Panel Local Democracy Reporting RNZ Commissioning RNZ Emergency Join & Follow RNZ Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram Sign up to RNZ Newsletters Terms of use © Copyright Radio New Zealand 2026 You have JavaScript disabled. Without it you will not be able to play audio or video, please enable JavaScript in your browser. Close banner