Man's body dug up and burned in the street 'after it was revealed he was gay' | News World | Metro News Metro logo Search Metro Search Metro Close Search Close Search My Account My Account Open Site Menu Open Site Menu Close Site Menu Close Site Menu Small logo Home Expand Home Submenu Expand Home Submenu Trending Newsletters Puzzles+ Video News Expand News Submenu Expand News Submenu UK London US World Crime Tech Science Politics News Updates newsletter E-edition Entertainment Expand Entertainment Submenu Expand Entertainment Submenu Showbiz TV Film Music Gaming Big Brother 2026 Strictly Come Dancing Sport Expand Sport Submenu Expand Sport Submenu Football Premier League Transfer News Cricket Boxing Tennis Snooker In The Mixer Lifestyle Expand Lifestyle Submenu Expand Lifestyle Submenu Sex Health Property Food Travel Horoscopes Money Shopping Lifeline The Slice newsletter Soaps Expand Soaps Submenu Expand Soaps Submenu EastEnders Emmerdale Coronation Street Hollyoaks Soaps Showbiz Soaps Newsletter Opinion Expand Opinion Submenu Expand Opinion Submenu Columnists Letters Cartoons Shopping Expand Shopping Submenu Expand Shopping Submenu Beauty Products Black Friday Amazon Prime Day Shopping Newsletter Metro Deals Puzzles Expand Puzzles Submenu Expand Puzzles Submenu Puzzles+ Quick Crossword Cryptic Crossword Word Wheel Hangman Easy Sudoku Medium Sudoku Hard Sudoku Money Expand Money Submenu Expand Money Submenu Metro Deals Investing Cost of Living Deals Hacks Saving Property Expand Property Submenu Expand Property Submenu What I Rent What I Own Property Prices Home renovations Interiors Renting Better Living The Key Newsletter Travel Expand Travel Submenu Expand Travel Submenu Travel Advice Travel Reviews Travel Inspiration The Getaway Horoscopes Expand Horoscopes Submenu Expand Horoscopes Submenu Your Daily Horoscope Astrology Tarot Chinese Zodiac Daily Horoscope Newsletter More Expand More Submenu Expand More Submenu Games Submit Stuff Competitions Advertise Weather Trending Privacy Policy Metro on Instagram Metro on Facebook Metro on X Metro on TikTok Man’s body dug up and burned in the street ‘after it was revealed he was gay’ Craig Munro | Senior Politics Reporter Published November 2, 2023 11:49am Updated November 2, 2023 5:28pm Share this article via whatsapp Share this article via x Copy the link to this article. Link is copied Share this article via facebook Comment now Comments The story has shocked many in Senegal, a conservative country where homosexuality is punishable with prison time (Picture: Jam Press Vid) Footage from Senegal shows the body of a man being exhumed and set on fire in the street after locals are said to have found out he was gay, in a case that has shocked the West African country. Four men have been arrested in connection with the incident, though images from the scene show a crowd of hundreds gathering around the fire. The 31-year-old man, named locally as Cheikh Fall, had been buried in Léona Niassene cemetery in the central Senegalese town of Kaolack on Friday evening. According to local media, his family had tried to arrange a burial in nearby Touba, which is the holy city of the Islamic Mouride brotherhood. However, the local authorities refused after learning the man was gay, so the family instead tried to inter him close to their home. When the local community objected to that, they decided to perform the burial in secret at Léona Niassene cemetery. But around 24 hours later, the body was exhumed and set alight in front of the large crowd. Despite the prevalence of anti-LGBTQ+ attitudes in Senegal, the case has been met with outrage in parts of the country. Abasse Yaya Wane, the head of the Kaolack Public Prosecutor’s Office, said: ‘These extremely serious acts, which amount to barbarism, challenge the authorities and cannot go unpunished.’ Join Metro's LGBTQ+ community on WhatsApp With thousands of members from all over the world, our vibrant LGBTQ+ WhatsApp channel is a hub for all the latest news and important issues that face the LGBTQ+ community. Simply click on this link , select ‘Join Chat’ and you’re in! Don't forget to turn on notifications! Trending Now Tech boss who slept in sauna on work trip allowed to seek £76,000,000 payout Channel: UK UK 1 day ago By Sarah Hooper 10 men jailed for 130 years after setting a mother and girl, 13, on fire Woman who complained about Auschwitz café told 'it's not a theme park' amid backlash Man rammed a tractor into home 'after graves of relatives desecrated' In Senegal, a conservative Muslim-majority country, same-sex sexual activity is illegal for both men and women. Those found guilty can face five years’ imprisonment, with the Human Dignity Trust saying LGBTQ+ people are ‘frequently subject to arrest and arbitrary detention where they are vulnerable to torture’. The local branch of Amnesty International condemned the incident in Kaolack in a statement released with two Senegalese human rights organisations. It said the actions of the participants violated ‘the dignity of the deceased and his family’. In February last year, thousands of people gathered in Dakar, the capital of Senegal, to call for harsher punishments for LGBTQ+ people. Ngoné Dia, a university student who took part in the demonstration, told VOA News : ‘We want them to be imprisoned, even if it’s forever. Senegal is a homophobic country and we’re proud to say it.’ Get in touch with our news team by emailing us at webnews@metro.co.uk . For more stories like this, check our news page . Comment now Comments Add Metro as a Preferred Source on Google Add as preferred source Puzzles Newsletter Get your favourite puzzles when they are ready to play on the website sent directly to you every day and track your daily streak! Email I agree to receive newsletters from Metro I agree to receive newsletters from Metro Sign Up Sign Up This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply. Your information will be used in line with our Privacy Policy Home divider News divider World Related topics Instagram Stories LGBTQ+ Metro newspaper Senegal The Russian plane that has sat at Swiss airport since start of Ukraine war Channel: World World 1 day ago By Ryan Prosser Mum and daughter both die from cancer 10 hours apart Channel: World World 1 day ago By Natalia Penza Must Read Play Video All the nations that walked out of Netanyahu's UN speech Channel: World World 2 days ago By Milo Pope Play Video Woman dies after monkey launches flying kick at her outside her home Channel: World World 5 days ago By Sarah Hooper Mum and daughter both die from cancer 10 hours apart Channel: World World 1 day ago By Natalia Penza Man, 82, dies after fight over sunlounger on Greek beach Channel: World World 6 days ago By Danni Scott At least 13 killed after plane crashes in emergency landing near homes Channel: World World 2 days ago By Noora Mykkanen Play Video Argentina president threatens to 'take matters into our own hands' over Falkland Islands Channel: World World 4 days ago By Sarah Hooper Play Video Putin wins 'sham' election - what does it mean for Nato? Channel: World World 6 days ago By Danni Scott Man jailed for writing 'Putin is a d***head' on ballot paper Channel: World World 5 days ago By Sarah Hooper The Russian plane that has sat at Swiss airport since start of Ukraine war Channel: World World 1 day ago By Ryan Prosser Poacher sneaking up on rhinos ambushed and trampled to death by elephants Channel: World World September 15, 2026 By Sarah Hooper Trending Now Read more stories Read more stories Tech boss who slept in sauna on work trip allowed to seek £76,000,000 payout Channel: UK UK 1 day ago By Sarah Hooper Farmer saw 'balaclava clad men scattering into woods' outside RAF Fairford Christa Pike to become first woman in 200 years to be executed in Tennessee Two people killed in fireball crash after BMW ploughs into lamppost in Rotherham 10 men jailed for 130 years after setting a mother and girl, 13, on fire Metro Shorts metro deals more offers more offers Bannatyne Spa Spa day for two with treatments, lunch & prosecco — save up to 57% off. Mystery Escape Hotel stay with return flights from as low as £92pp — save on worldwide holiday packages. Beach Retreat (Lanzarote) 4* Lanzarote beach holiday with flights — save up to 58%. UK Getaway 4* Radisson Blu Durham stay with breakfast, spa access & late checkout — save 60% off. Drive Supercars 3–12 lap supercar driving experiences from £16.99 — save up to 65%. Metro logo © 2026 Associated Newspapers Limited Powered by WordPress.com VIP Your ad choices IPSO Regulated Contributors Newzit Daily Mail Terms and Conditions Privacy Policy Do not sell or share my personal information Site map Contact Us About Metro on Instagram Metro on Facebook Metro on X Metro on TikTok Close Login OK, logging you in... Just a moment, creating your account...