South Korea | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview South Korea At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Legal Gender Recognition Possible? Yes LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? Yes Last Update: March 12, 2026 South Korea has seen gradual increases in public visibility of queer and trans communities, yet legal protections remain limited and uneven. Consensual same-sex conduct is criminalized within the military under Article 92-6 of the Military Criminal Act, a discriminatory provision that was upheld by the Constitutional Court in 2023, although same-sex relations between civilians are legal. South Korea does not have a comprehensive antidiscrimination law covering sexual orientation, gender identity, or sex characteristics, and repeated proposals have stalled in the National Assembly amid political reluctance and organized opposition from conservative groups . Transgender people can change their legal gender, but the process requires medical intervention. In November 2022, the Supreme Court ruled that having children of minor age should not be grounds to refuse requests to change gender markers, affirming trans people’s right to legal gender recognition and right to a family life. Intersex people remain largely unrecognized in law and policy, and nonconsensual medical interventions on intersex infants and children are not prohibited by law. Same-sex couples are not allowed to enter into marriages or civil unions. However, in July 2024, the Supreme Court affirmed that same-sex partners are entitled to state benefits such as spousal coverage under the National Health Insurance Service—the first judicial recognition of limited rights for same-sex couples. In October 2024, eleven same-sex couples filed lawsuits after district offices rejected their marriage registrations, arguing that the government’s refusal constitutes unequal treatment under the law. The cases remain pending as of 2025. Same-sex couples were included for the first time in the 2025 Population and Housing Census, allowing them to be recorded as “spouses” or “cohabiting partners.” Although LGBTIQ organizations can openly register and operate, social stigma and political resistance persist. Major political parties do not publicly support LGBTIQ-inclusive reforms, while some political actors openly engage in anti-LGBTIQ campaigning. According to a 2025 survey , 43 percent of respondents had “hostile” feelings toward male homosexuals, 54 percent were hostile to lesbians, and 51 percent were against queer festivals . Other surveys demonstrate varying levels of acceptance: a 2020 poll showed that 79 percent of respondents aged 18 to 29 believed that homosexuality should be accepted by society, while a 2017 survey showed that 60 percent of respondents supported protecting trans people from discrimination. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International