Non-discrimination - UNHCR Switzerland Switzerland ☰ Menu English Welcome Ukraine Help in Ukraine and neighbouring countries Entry and asylum in Switzerland Life in Switzerland for S Status-Beneficiaries Stay safe on the journey Are you under 18 years old? Voluntary return to Ukraine Syria Voluntary return to Syria Iran Where to seek help Legal counselling Assistance services Emergency numbers Asylum in Switzerland Safe pathways to Switzerland Entering Switzerland with a regular visa Family reunification Resettlement Humanitarian visa Rights and Duties Non-refoulement Non-discrimination Right to stay Social welfare benefits Healthcare Social security Integration support Housing Change of canton Right to education Right to work Travel abroad Family reunification Taxes Voluntary Return Statelessness Information for Children Questions and Answers Activities Reporting misconduct UNHCR Switzerland and Liechtenstein Data protection and privacy notice Non-discrimination In Switzerland, everyone has the right to equal treatment and non-discrimination . Discrimination based on origin, race, gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, age, language, social status, lifestyle, religious, philosophical, or political beliefs, or physical, mental, or psychological disability is prohibited . Members of the LGBTIQ+ community enjoy equal rights in Switzerland. Since 1 July 2022, same-sex couples can get married. Information on reporting mechanisms and support available to victims of discrimination in Switzerland is available here: Assistance services – UNHCR Switzerland . You can find a list of relevant organizations by clicking on “ Racism and hate speech ” and “ LGBTIQ+ ”. For more information on racial discrimination monitoring in Switzerland you can consult the Federal Commission against Racism’s website (only in French , German or Italian ). Discrimination and Racism are explained further on the website of the non-governmental organization humanrights.ch (only in French or German). Last update: 6 May 2026 Back to homepage Select another country I am looking for... Search Cancel Share: WhatsApp Facebook Telegram Viber VK Twitter unhcr.org Privacy Policy Change Country × Call UNHCR toll-free from your browser You are about to call UNHCR. If you are ready, please click next to allow microphone access when asked so we can hear you. Next Set your browser permissions Please give permission to access your microphone and geolocation when prompted by your browser. Sharing your location is optional, but enabling your microphone is required for UNHCR operator to hear you. Example microphone permissions prompt that will appear in your browser: Example Previous Next Toll-free call to UNHCR Call UNHCR Cancel ❌ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 * 0 # Mute Unmute End call Back to the instructions Reload this page Call UNHCR