Trans medical tourism is booming in Iran, while transitions are forced on locals - LGBTQ Nation Queerty : Culture Outsports : Sports GayCities : Travel LGBTQ Outpost : Shopping Login Become a Member Newsletter WhatsApp Facebook Instagram Twitter Threads Bluesky Menu Politics Good News Pride in Pictures Monthly Issue 🏳️‍🌈 100% LGBTQ+ Owned Politics Good News Pride in Pictures Monthly Issue Families Law & Policy Life Crime & Justice Arts & Media Commentary About Us Store Login Become a Member Part of the Q.Digital family of brands: Queerty GayCities INTO Outsports LGBTQ Outpost WhatsApp Facebook Instagram Twitter Threads Bluesky Law & Policy Trans medical tourism is booming in Iran, while transitions are forced on locals Prices for gender affirming surgery are lower in the Islamic Republic, and their industry has been fostered for decades by forced transitions. Greg Owen October 13, 2025, 9:30 am EDT Share: TEHRAN, IRAN - September 2014. Iranians in the everyday life of the capital of Iran - Tehran. | Shutterstock In Iran, where being gay can carry the death penalty and the idea of marriage equality is an abomination, gender transition-related medical care has long been a booming business serving locals and foreigners alike. Part of the Islamic Republic’s expertise in the field comes from 40 years of forcing gay people to choose between transitioning and death. Related 100 trans inmates presumed dead after Israeli attack on notorious Iranian prison But now, in a desperate search for currency in the cash-strapped country, the government is luring patients from around the world with steep discounts and luxury lodging, The New York Times reports. Crippled by war and economic sanctions, Iran has launched a PR blitz promoting its expertise to a global audience, luring foreigners with trans-themed packages including budget-conscious surgeries, luxury hotel stays, and sightseeing tours. Never Miss a Beat Subscribe to our newsletter to stay ahead of the latest LGBTQ+ political news and insights. Please enable JavaScript in your browser to complete this form. Please enable JavaScript in your browser to complete this form. Email Frequency Email * Frequency * Daily Brief Week in Review Week in Good News Sign Up Iran’s theocratic government has set a goal of generating more than $7 billion from medical tourism annually, according to Iranian state news media , a seven-fold increase over a year ago. In addition to nose jobs and hair transplants, glossy brochures and a social media campaign are offering vaginoplasties, mastectomies, and penis constructions for a song. “We handle everything from start to finish, providing the best medical services to ensure a stress-free experience,” said Farideh Najafi, the manager of two medical tourism companies. “This includes booking hotels, hospitals, transportation, and more.” According to one operator, while the cost of comprehensive surgery in the U.S. could be “around $45,000, and in Thailand, it’s approximately $30,000,” patients can pay “less than $12,000” in Iran. A government hospital stay can go for as low as $4,500. The cut-rate prices are luring patients from wealthier countries like Australia, the United States, and Europe, according to medical tour operators and surgeons, despite the dark backdrop to the country’s transgender expertise. Many gay and lesbian Iranians who are not trans are “pressured into undergoing gender reassignment surgery without their free consent,” according to a United Nations Human Rights Council report issued in March, and the alternative can be execution. Amnesty International says more than 5000 gay people have been put to death in the Islamic Republic since the Iranian Revolution in 1979. Public flogging is even more common. A British Home Office report in 2022 found that roughly 4,000 people underwent transition surgery each year in Iran, compared to just under 13,000 in the U.S. in 2020, which has a population four times greater. The vast majority of patients come from inside Iran, experts say. The extraordinary number has its basis in a fatwa issued by Ayatollah Khomeini, the founding supreme leader of the Islamic Republic. He declared in the 1980s that transgender individuals could gain legal recognition of their identifying gender on the condition that they underwent transition surgery. The volume of surgeries has come with a questionable safety record. A 2015 U.N. report described botched procedures like “abnormally shaped or located sexual organs.” Some activists have likened the country’s gender clinics to “ butcher ” shops. Raha Ajoudani, a 20-year-old trans woman and activist, fled Iran rather than submit to a forced transition. “I never wanted to undergo gender reassignment surgery,” she said. “I’ve defined myself outside of this binary. I didn’t want to live according to the governmental definition of cultural expectations of being a woman or a man, nor did I submit to Khomeini’s fatwa.” Eric, a 45-year-old trans man living in Canada, did take advantage of Iran’s expertise in the field, but acknowledged competing feelings over his choice and the plight of gay people in the country. “I have heard a lot, especially among trans women, that because they are gay, and they cannot be gay in Iran, they try to do the surgery,” he said. “I’m really sad that gays and lesbians are not recognized in Iran, but on the other hand, I’m happy for trans people because they can do what they’re willing to do.” Subscribe to the LGBTQ Nation newsletter and be the first to know about the latest headlines shaping LGBTQ+ communities worldwide. Greg Owen writes about politics and culture for LGBTQ Nation. An award-winning writer, producer and journalist, he was recently recognized for Excellence in Online Journalism by NLGJA: the Association of LGBTQ Journalists for his coverage of the 2024 election. He's written for Q Digital since 2015 and for LGBTQ Nation since 2022. Connect with Greg Owen: See more: Law & Policy , Ayatollah Khomeini , forced transition , Iran , Islamic Republic , medical tourism , Transgender Related Trans man in Japan seeks legal recognition as father after providing egg for his child 100 orgs urge Aussie gov’t not to weaken trans protections: “It will create… more uncertainty & more harm.” Mother of Renee Good says she voted for Trump to fight “terrorists,” not “innocents” Help make LGBTQ Nation 1,500 Strong Independent LGBTQ+ journalism matters more than ever. This September, help us reach 1,500 members and keep LGBTQ+ stories, voices, and reporting available to millions of readers. $25 $50 $100 $150 Or give a different amount: $ $5/month $10/month $25/month $50/month $60/year $100/year $200/year $365/year We accept all major credit cards, Apple Pay, and Google Pay. 🏳️‍🌈 100% LGBTQ+ Owned ✔️ Always Free Journalism 🔒 Secure Payments ❌ Cancel Anytime Latest Election News Texas Trump voters explain why they hate “morally corrupt” Ken Paxton: “People won’t vote for him” “Because [Republicans] picked him, they stand to lose the state.” 4 minute read · 1790535600 Read Commentary After 15 years in women’s prison, I realized I was a lesbian As I served a life sentence, I had given up on love. Then I met Paige. 10 minute read · 1790528400 Read Life Boebert’s not a lesbian, Republican warns about “furry pilots” & drag star speaks truth to power Here are the top stories of the week that you might have missed. 5 minute read · September 27, 2026 Read Life A lifetime on the margins & a manslaughter case full of questions Connor Schuyler fled anti-LGBTQ+ abuse as a child and survived homelessness, addiction and prison. Then he found himself in prison. 11 minute read · September 26, 2026 Read Life Hungarian gay couple trying to adopt for 5 years finally making headway under new government “We didn’t feel outright hostility, but when we first met social services it was clear they had an unspoken inclination.” 4 minute read · September 26, 2026 Read Commentary Don’t be fooled: The patriarchy is alive & fully functioning It’s so prevalent that it’s virtually invisible to some men and women alike. 8 minute read · September 26, 2026 Read Life “Legislation anxiety” is plaguing trans people nationwide There is “an environment of fear no matter where I go,” said one participant in a new study. 3 minute read · September 26, 2026 Read Life Anti-trans politician kicked out of public event after repeatedly misgendering his trans opponent PLUS: Dolly Parton’s encouraging advice and a drag king wants to be a castle’s witch! 3 minute read · September 26, 2026 Read Life Pete Hegseth is withholding pay from discharged trans soldiers. LGBTQ+ Dems are demanding answers. “This is unacceptable and appears to be another broken promise by this Administration.” 3 minute read · September 25, 2026 Read Politics “Disappointed and ashamed”: LGBTQ+ & ally groups slam Dem Rep. Marcy Kaptur’s anti-trans ads Democratic groups are urging her to change course. 5 minute read · September 25, 2026 Read Crime & Justice His allegedly homophobic boss at JPMorgan gave him panic attacks. So now he’s suing the company. He said the mistreatment caused him to start pulling his own hair out. 3 minute read · September 25, 2026 Read Politics Pete Buttigieg slams Trump for renaming airport after himself: “Surely we can do better than that?” Buttigieg tried to focus on the positive aspects of the airport’s renovation work, while commenting on the renaming. 2 minute read · September 25, 2026 Read Related See all Law & Policy Trans man in Japan seeks legal recognition as father after providing egg for his child Japan’s civil code hasn’t caught up to evolving families. 3 minute read · September 25, 2026 Read Law & Policy 100 orgs urge Aussie gov’t not to weaken trans protections: “It will create… more uncertainty & more harm.” The letter addresses a new push from anti-trans activists in response to a pro-trans ruling from an Australian court. 4 minute read · September 24, 2026 Read Law & Policy Mother of Renee Good says she voted for Trump to fight “terrorists,” not “innocents” “I am a registered Republican. I voted for President Trump under the impression that these agents were here to protect the citizens of the United States.” 2 minute read · September 23, 2026 Read Law & Policy Pride event organizers pledge to fight back after city denies permit: “We’re not going away.” “We are a resilient people who have always fought for our rights throughout history,” organizers wrote. 3 minute read · September 23, 2026 Read Law & Policy Rosie O’Donnell says Trump admin pressured ABC to block her interview of Epstein victims She eventually met with the women herself and made a powerful video about their plight. 3 minute read · September 22, 2026 Read Law & Policy Hate group sues school district for not notifying Christian dad about lessons on anti-bullying The father is angry because the lesson included discussions on how bias and bullying affect LGBTQ+ students. 3 minute read · September 21, 2026 Read Law & Policy Court rules trans women can be housed in men’s prisons & calls them men “who claim to be female” The three-judge panel of the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals consisted exclusively of Donald Trump appointees. 4 minute read · September 21, 2026 Read Law & Policy A gay man deported to a different country than his own has gone silent Pietro Graza was shackled for 36 hours and taken to a hotel where he and other deportees remain in legal limbo. 9 minute read · September 20, 2026 Read Law & Policy Notorious anti-trans activist melts down at school board meeting: “This is insane!” Beth Bourne, a local Moms for Liberty leader, called teachers “f**king idiots” and “brainwashed.” 4 minute read · September 18, 2026 Read Law & Policy EEOC agrees to let Christian employers misgender trans employees The Christian employers said Biden era workplace harassment rules violated their religious freedom. 3 minute read · September 18, 2026 Read Law & Policy Another over 100 people detained for protesting Turkey’s anti-LGBTQ+ arrests Without evidence, the Turkish government claims the crackdowns are about “keeping families safe.” 4 minute read · September 18, 2026 Read Law & Policy Parents say the state took their trans kid because they denied his gender. The truth is far darker. State Gov. Maura Healey (D) helped set the record straight. 5 minute read · September 17, 2026 Read More Stories We're Talking About Politics Alyssa Edwards reads Ken Paxton for filth after disgusting attack: “Texas is big enough for all of us” Mess with Alyssa Edwards, you’re going to get the horns. September 25, 2026 · Queerty Politics Is Peter Thiel breaking up with JD Vance? All good things must come to an end. September 25, 2026 · Queerty Politics “F THOSE B*TCHES”: Why queer voters aren’t canceling Mary Peltola over her NYT exposé Looking at the accusations against Mary Peltola. September 24, 2026 · Queerty Politics Melania praises life under communism while plugging the sequel to her -$65M box office bomb Melania Tr*mp dropped by Fox & Friends this week to discuss her mysterious new female “empowerment” venture, promote her upcoming docuseries nobody asked for, and wax nostalgic about how delightful it was to grow up in Eastern Europe under authoritarian rule. September 24, 2026 · Queerty Politics GOP lawmaker has wild 20-minute meltdown on Senate floor over “furry pilots” & trans people He’s got bigger problems than furries in flight September 24, 2026 · Queerty Politics Now even Republicans want answers on Don Jr.’s Russian ties after wedding scandal Could Don Jr.’s scandal finally bring down the whole empire? September 23, 2026 · Queerty Politics She promised to carry on Lindsey Graham’s legacy. Now her campaign is imploding. Cue the off alarm bells for Republicans! 🚨 🚨 🚨 This could be the Senate flip nobody saw coming! September 23, 2026 · Queerty Politics Influencer says he posed as a gay escort at RNC & takes us on a wild ride Nick Pringle knew that posing as a male escort at the RNC would be a dangerous assignment… September 23, 2026 · Queerty Politics State-run “Tr*mp TV” is already a disaster of humiliating proportions Well that was a flop! September 22, 2026 · Queerty Politics From hookup app to Capitol Hill: Why Grindr is hosting members of Congress Grindr played host to a surprising visitor. September 22, 2026 · Queerty Politics Somehow Don Jr.’s Russian wedding scandal just got 10 times worse He just keeps getting in deeper September 22, 2026 · Queerty Politics Wait…did Lauren Boebert actually have lesbian affairs with staffers? A new complaint makes some pretty explosive allegations September 21, 2026 · Queerty Newsletter WhatsApp Facebook Instagram Twitter Threads Bluesky About Us Contact Us Privacy Policy AI Policy Terms of Service Privacy Notice for California Residents Monthly Issue © 2010 - 2026 LGBTQ Nation® | Proudly LGBTQ+ Owned and Operated 🏳️‍🌈 🏳️‍⚧️ LGBTQ Nation is a registered trademark of Q.Digital, Inc., registered in the state of California. $5/month $10/month $25/month $50/month $60/year $100/year $200/year $365/year We accept all major credit cards, Apple Pay, and Google Pay. 🏳️‍🌈 100% LGBTQ+ Owned ✔️ Always Free Journalism 🔒 Secure Payments ❌ Cancel Anytime