NT government's anti-discrimination law changes to 'restore' free speech pass parliament - ABC News Skip to main content Skip to news navigation, settings and search Explore the ABC More from ABC Close menu ABC ABC News ABC iview ABC listen Kids & Students Indigenous Information & Services Editorial Policies Read our editorial guiding principles Follow the ABC news iview listen Loading ABC News Just In For You Politics World Business Analysis Sport Lifestyle Entertainment Quizzes More Search News Home Just In For You Analysis Rural Watch Live Health Indigenous Politics Science Deep Time Elections World Environment Investigations Business Local news Quizzes Sport AFL NRL Football Tennis Cricket Netball Lifestyle Wellbeing Relationships & Family Food & Recipes Personal Finance Home & Garden Entertainment TV & Movies Books Music Pop Culture Arts Facebook YouTube Instagram Twitter Emergency Backstory Newsletters 中文新闻 BERITA BAHASA INDONESIA TOK PISIN Appearance (BETA) Follow system settings Select an option Always light Always dark Follow system settings ABC iView ABC Listen ABC News News Home NT government's anti-discrimination law changes to 'restore' free speech pass parliament Share Share article NT government's anti-discrimination law changes to 'restore' free speech pass parliament J By Jack Hislop Topic: Discrimination Posted Fri 17 Oct 2025 at 3:24pm Fri 17 Oct 2025 at 3:24pm Fri 17 Oct 2025 at 3:24pm Marie-Clare Boothby introduced the bill to parliament after backtracking on plans to scrap a "vilification section" in the Anti-Discrimination Act. ( ABC News: Dane Hirst ) In short: Changes to the Northern Territory's anti-discrimination laws have passed parliament, with the government claiming they will "restore" freedom of speech and religion. The amendments mean it will no longer be unlawful to "offend, insult, humiliate or intimidate" another person or group based on a protected attribute in public. What next? Religious schools will also now be able to discriminate by preferencing employees who share the same religious beliefs. abc.net.au/news/anti-discrimination-bill-passes-nt-parliament-free-speech/105903490 Link copied Share Share article Amendments to the Northern Territory's anti-discrimination laws that the Country Liberal Party (CLP) government claims will "restore" freedom of speech and religion have passed parliament. The CLP promised to make changes to the NT's Anti-Discrimination Act before the August 2024 territory election, which the party won from opposition in a landslide. Its election commitment followed amendments made to the Act by the former Labor government in 2022, which strengthened vilification provisions. At the time, the CLP claimed Labor's changes had eroded the territory's "larrikin culture" . Marie-Clare Boothby says the CLP's changes will not allow or condone "hate speech". ( ABC News: Pete Garnish ) After the election, the new government initially announced it would scrap a provision prohibiting conduct likely to "offend, insult, humiliate or intimidate" another person or group based on a protected attribute in public, but then back-pedalled and opted to revise the wording instead . In the changes passed by the parliament on Thursday night, the government amended that section of the Act to replace the words "offend, insult, humiliate or intimidate" with "incite hatred towards, serious contempt for or severe ridicule of". During the debate, Attorney-General Marie-Clare Boothby said the amendment would restore "freedom of speech, especially for individuals and religious communities", "without allowing [or] condoning hate speech". 'We saved our section' NT Anti-Discrimination Commissioner Jeswynn Yogaratnam criticised the changes, saying they were "not about freedom of speech" or "freedom of religion". "It was really about a pre-election promise to place power and privilege back to groups that already are in places of power and privilege," he said. Jeswynn Yogaratnam says he is pleased the "vilification section" of the Act was retained, despite being "watered down". ( ABC News: Pete Garnish ) "[The changes go] against what we call the beneficial principle of the legislation … that we are here to provide for the vulnerable groups, groups that are marginalised." Although critical of the amendments, Mr Yogaratnam said he was glad the vilification section of the Act was not completely removed as originally planned. "We saved our vilification section, albeit watered down," he said. Schools able to discriminate when hiring A new section of the Act introduced under the changes will now provide "an exemption for religious educational institutions to discriminate" by allowing them to preference employees based on their shared religious beliefs. Before the bill was reintroduced to parliament on Thursday, it was last month pulled from the parliamentary agenda when Ms Boothby said the government had withdrawn it to consult further with religious groups. NT rolls back controversial 'offence' law A controversial anti-hate speech measure is being scrapped in the Northern Territory, just three years after being introduced. Some Christian organisations had called for further changes to the Act which would have allowed schools to legally sanction staff whose actions conflicted with their religious values. However, those changes were not included in the amendments passed on Thursday. Australian Christian Lobby NT director Nick Lay said the government had missed a "real opportunity" to "give best case scenario, best legal protections for schools to maintain their faith-based ethos". "We had some great suggestions about what that looked like and the government decided that they would instead revive the old provisions but dropping a few elements," he told ABC Radio Darwin. Mr Lay said the final position was "less than ideal", saying the NT could now be "the most hostile jurisdiction, still, for faith-based schools to exist". Share options Copy link Facebook X (formerly Twitter) See more ABC coverage in your search results Make ABC a preferred source in Google Top Stories Rinehart allegedly tried to help recruit Liberal MP to join One Nation Topic: One Nation Men accused of planning terrorist attack at RAF base used to strike Iran Topic: Terrorism Banks cut rewards programs, free travel insurance amid surcharge ban Topic: Banking Migration cuts, AI and rising interest rates mean an era of long-term disinflation A Analysis by Alan Kohler Hundreds of Russian hybrid attacks serve to 'wake everyone up' in NATO Topic: Surveillance Related stories New police rank, anti-discrimination reforms pulled — the week in NT parliament Topic: State and Territory Parliament Discrimination watchdog accuses NT government of attacking independence Topic: Discrimination NT government accused of 'watering down' anti-discrimination laws Topic: State and Territory Government Related topics Darwin Discrimination NT State and Territory Government State and Territory Parliament Top Stories Rinehart allegedly tried to help recruit Liberal MP to join One Nation Topic: One Nation Men accused of planning terrorist attack at RAF base used to strike Iran Topic: Terrorism Banks cut rewards programs, free travel insurance amid surcharge ban Topic: Banking Migration cuts, AI and rising interest rates mean an era of long-term disinflation A Analysis by Alan Kohler Hundreds of Russian hybrid attacks serve to 'wake everyone up' in NATO Topic: Surveillance Just In Young Arrernte boxer sets sights on Olympics after AIS opportunity Topic: Boxing Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:07am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:07am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:07am Treasurer to unveil $6 billion improvement to federal budget LIVE Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:02am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:02am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:02am Wall Street closes higher, ASX lacks direction ahead of rates decision LIVE Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:59am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:59am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:59am Police launch murder probe after death west of Brisbane Topic: Homicide Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:57am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:57am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:57am More Just In Back to top ABC News Contact ABC News Your home of Australian stories, conversations and events that shape our nation. This service may include material from Agence France-Presse (AFP), APTN, Reuters, AAP, CNN and the BBC World Service which is copyright and cannot be reproduced. Follow ABC News Sections ABC News Home Just In For You Watch Live News Live ABC NewsRadio Politics Elections Australia World Sport Live Sport Rural Business Analysis Science Health Lifestyle Entertainment Quizzes More Topics News in Language Chinese 中文 Tok Pisin Berita Bahasa Indonesia Related ABC News app Local News ABC Emergency ABC Indigenous ABC Religion & Ethics ABC Asia ABC Pacific Music & Audio ABC Listen Home triple j Live Radio Movies & TV ABC iview Home List of ABC Shows Live TV TV Guide Kids & Students BTN Education Heywire Takeover ABC Kids Get the ABC News AM newsletter Get the latest ABC News delivered to your email inbox Email address Subscribe Your information is being handled in accordance with the ABC Privacy Collection Statement . All ABC newsletters Stay informed and connected with the ABC. Covering a wide range of topics and brands including News, iview, listen, and more. Browse all ABC newsletters ABC home Information & Services Editorial Policies Accessibility Help Contact Us Commercial Careers About the ABC Privacy Policy Terms of Use © 2026 ABC Follow the ABC We acknowledge Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the First Australians and Traditional Custodians of the lands where we live, learn and work.