Gender identity in the Swiss civil status register ‒ Community & Support ‐ EPFL Skip to content About Education Research Innovation Schools Campus Search on the site Validate Show / hide the search form Search on the site Hide the search form EN FR EN DE IT Menu … Afficher l'intégralité du fil d'Ariane Campus Affiche les pages de même niveau About Education Research Innovation Schools Campus Laboratories list Community & Support Affiche les pages de même niveau Services & Resources EPFL Library Restaurants – Shops – Hotels Health, safety and prevention Sports and physical activity Community & Support Spiritual Care Events Arts and culture Associations Visit EPFL Mobility and Travel LGBTIQ+ Affiche les pages de même niveau Psychosocial risks Mental Health and Well-being LGBTIQ+ Family and work-life Equality and careers Student services Current initiatives Get involved Gender identity in the Swiss civil status register Affiche les pages de même niveau Gender identity in the Swiss civil status register Using a preferred name at EPFL Safe Space About Education Research Innovation Schools Campus In the same section Gender identity in the Swiss civil status register Using a preferred name at EPFL Safe Space Gender identity in the Swiss civil status register Sex and First Name in the Civil Registry Since January 1st, 2022, any person residing in Switzerland and legally registered in a Swiss municipality (commune/Gemeinde) may, through a personal declaration before a civil registrar, change the sex marker and/or first name listed in the civil registry. Requests to change the sex marker are generally limited to the binary categories (female or male). As the legislation allows for a degree of cantonal flexibility, some municipalities only permit the change of sex or name individually, while others require a simultaneous change of both if the name is considered gendered. Non-Recognition of Non-Binary Identities Switzerland does not yet fully recognise non-binary identities in civil status or administrative documents. Although current legislation allows for changes to the sex marker in the civil registry, the Swiss administrative system remains largely built around the binary categories “female” and “male”. Official documents such as passports and ID cards currently do not include a non-binary gender option. There are ongoing discussions about introducing an “X” marker for non-binary individuals, but it has not yet been implemented at the national level. Swiss Citizens Once the change(s) have been made at the civil registry office, Swiss citizens must renew their identity documents. Foreign Nationals Individuals legally residing in Switzerland with a foreign passport may initiate this procedure. They are not required to update their identity documents in their country of origin. The civil registry office issues a certificate confirming the change of sex and/or first name in the civil records. This document serves as official proof of the change. Depending on the situation, the individual may then initiate procedures with the cantonal population office to update their residence permit, in accordance with the regulations in their canton. Residence permits are not issued by the civil registry office but may be updated by the relevant authority (such as the Population or Migration Office) following the changes recorded in the civil registry. If necessary, the individual may also request an update to their passport or ID card from their country of origin, depending on the applicable national procedures. The civil registry office does not forward any information to the embassy or consulate of the person’s country of origin. Right to Self-Determination Changes to the sex marker and/or first name in the civil registry are based on the individual’s right to self-determination, meaning the decision is based on their personal and intimate sense of identity. The conviction must also be consistent, meaning the person should be convinced of the enduring nature of their identity. Individuals aged 16 and over may make this change without the consent of their legal guardian(s). Costs The procedure to change the sex marker and/or first name costs between CHF 75 and CHF 105. In the Canton of Vaud, individuals may be exempted from these fees upon presentation of a certificate of social assistance (Revenu d’insertion) or a student certificate (from age 16). How to Proceed Visit the website of the civil registry office in your area to receive full information on how to proceed. Gender Marker on EPFL Directories You can hide your gender marker by modifying your People page, following this procedure. Need Support? For any questions or assistance, please contact the Equal Opportunity Office (VPH-WINC-DEI) at [email protected] . About Organization and identity Associated Campuses Data Presidency Vice Presidencies Working at EPFL Recruiting EPFL Talents Equality, Diversity, Inclusion Respect Sustainability News & Media Philanthropy EPFL Alumni Education Admission Academic Calendar Preparatory Year (CMS) Bachelor Master Doctorate SHS Program Continuing Education - Extension School Study Management International Teaching Educational Initiatives Education & Science Outreach Infrastructures Under Development Engaging with Society Research Mission and Policy Research Domains EPFL Research Facilities Faculty Members Solutions 4 Sustainability - S4S Awards and Prizes Funding Opportunities Research Management Support From Lab to Market Research Ethics Research with Animals Open Science Innovation Industry Collaboration Innovation Initiatives Startup Launchpad Campus Services & Resources Library Restaurants, Shops & Hotels Security, Prevention & Health Sports Community & Support Chaplaincy Events Arts & Culture Associations Visit EPFL Mobility & Travel Schools & Colleges School of Architecture, Civil & Environmental Engineering ENAC School of Basic Sciences SB School of Engineering STI School of Computer & Communication Sciences IC School of Life Sciences SV College of Management of Technology CDM Practical Services & Resources Emergencies: +41 21 693 3000 Contact Map Follow EPFL on social media Follow us on Facebook Follow us on Instagram Follow us on LinkedIn Follow us on Mastodon Follow us on X Follow us on Youtube Accessibility Disclaimer Privacy policy © 2025 EPFL, all rights reserved Back to top