Transgender Idahoans sue over law that criminalizes using bathrooms that align with gender identity Skip to content Site Search Republish This Story Close * Please read before republishing * We’re happy to make this story available to republish for free under an Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives Creative Commons license as long as you follow our republishing guidelines, which require that you credit The 19th and retain our pixel. See our full guidelines for more information . To republish, simply copy the HTML at right, which includes our tracking pixel, all paragraph styles and hyperlinks, the author byline and credit to The 19th. Have questions? Please email [email protected] . — The Editors Loading... Copy HTML Modal Gallery Close / Sign up for our newsletter Menu Home We’re an independent, nonprofit newsroom reporting on gender, politics, policy and power. Read our story . Topics Politics LGBTQ+ Health Justice Caregiving Education Abortion View all topics Daily Newsletter A smart, relatable digest of our latest stories and top news affecting women and LGBTQ+ people. Look for a confirmation sent to Email Subscribe Did you mean ? I agree to the terms The email didn't go through. Try again with a new email or Contact us for support Latest Stories Our Mission Our Team Strategic Plan Support the 19th Search Contact Open Menu Donate Home We’re an independent, nonprofit newsroom reporting on gender, politics, policy and power. Read our story . Daily Newsletter A smart, relatable digest of our latest stories and top news affecting women and LGBTQ+ people. Look for a confirmation sent to Email Subscribe Did you mean ? I agree to the terms The email didn't go through. Try again with a new email or Contact us for support Become a member The 19th thanks our sponsors. Become one . LGBTQ+ Transgender Idahoans sue over law that criminalizes using bathrooms that align with gender identity Criminal transgender bathroom ban is only state law that extends to private businesses, and has steeper penalties than others, ACLU says. A bathroom sign at the State Capitol Building in Boise, Idaho. (Pat Sutphin/Idaho Capital Sun) Kyle Pfannenstiel, Idaho Capital Sun Published 2026-04-30 11:58 11:58 April 30, 2026 am America/Chicago Republish this story Share Bluesky Facebook Email Six transgender Idahoans on Thursday sued to attempt to prevent from going into effect a new state law that criminalizes transgender people using bathrooms that align with their gender identity, including in private businesses. The lawsuit is challenging House Bill 752 , which passed the Idaho Legislature this year with support from only Republicans and was signed into law by Gov. Brad Little. The law takes effect July 1. “H.B. 752 presents transgender Idahoans with an impossible choice: use a restroom that does not align with their gender identity and risk severe physical and psychological harms, or continue to use restrooms in public in accordance with their gender identity and risk a criminal record and imprisonment,” the lawsuit argues. “This law upends public life not only for transgender Idahoans but for everyone who uses public restrooms in Idaho.” The 19th thanks our sponsors. Become one . Idaho’s new law will create criminal charges for people who “knowingly and willfully” enter a bathroom or changing room designated for the opposite sex, with some exceptions. The bill would apply in government-owned buildings and places of public accommodations , like private businesses. A first offense carries a misdemeanor, punishable by up to one year in prison. A second offense within five years is a felony, punishable by up to five years in prison. The lawsuit argues that Idaho’s bathroom ban violates due process and equal protection rights in the U.S. Constitution’s 14th Amendment. The lawsuit asks a federal judge to stop the law’s restrictions on transgender people’s bathroom access. The suing transgender Idahoans are represented by attorneys with the American Civil Liberties Union, ACLU’s Idaho chapter and Lambda Legal. The lawsuit seeks class-action protections for all transgender people whose bathroom access will be restricted by the new law. The ACLU says that Idaho’s bathroom ban is the only state ban that extends to private businesses — and that Idaho’s ban has the steepest penalties out of the three states that have criminal bathroom bans. The lawsuit was filed in federal court against Idaho Attorney General Raúl Labrador and county prosecutors. In a statement, Idaho Attorney General’s Office spokesperson Damon Sidur said “We look forward to defending the law.” How one transgender woman is bracing for the law One of the people suing, Emilie Jackson-Edney, is a 77-year-old transgender woman who has lived in Idaho her entire life, the lawsuit says. People perceive her as a female, and call her ma’am, the lawsuit says. For 20 years, she has used the women’s bathroom in public “without issue,” the lawsuit says. She worries about her safety if she complies with the new law, the lawsuit says. “She fears that if she were to walk into a space designated for men, it would immediately cause attention and disruption,” the lawsuit says. “She would be worried that she could be exposed to violence by being perceived as a woman in an all-male space or being perceived as a transgender woman because of the law’s new requirements.” If the law goes into effect, the lawsuit says Jackson-Edney “plans to decrease her time spent in public to reduce the need to use public restrooms,” and she “plans to drink less water and eat less to ensure that she would not need to use public restrooms.” Republicans say bill protects women, girls, but police say law would be hard to enforce In debate over the bill, several Republican lawmakers who supported the bill said it was meant to protect women and girls. “It prevents discomfort and voyeurism escalation and assaults, while preserving single-user options and narrow exceptions so no one is denied access for emergency aid,” said bill sponsor Rep. Cornel Rasor, a Republican from Sagle. But Sen. Ron Taylor, a Democrat from Hailey, told senators in debate that the bill is about discrimination. He said constituents told him that they’d move out of Idaho if it passed because it would throw their transgender children in jail. More from The 19th Idaho considers an ‘apocalyptic’ choice for disabled people and families Senate Democrats are still waffling when asked about trans rights ‘I’m heartbroken’: Trans Kansans reckon with their driver’s licenses being invalidated The bill was opposed during the legislative session by some law enforcement groups and several transgender Idahoans. A 2025 study by the UCLA School of Law’s Williams Institute found “no evidence of increased harms to people who are not transgender when transgender people are allowed to use restrooms and other gendered facilities according to their identity.” But when trans people are refused access to facilities that align with their gender, the study found that trans people report verbal harassment and physical assault. The bill builds on a wave of anti-LGBTQ+ legislation that the Legislature and governor have approved in recent years. The bill outlines several exceptions, including to give medical assistance, law enforcement assistance, and if someone “is in dire need of urinating or defecating and such facility is the only facility reasonably available at the time of the person’s use.” The Idaho Fraternal Order of Police flagged that exception as concerning. “Officers responding to a complaint would be placed in the difficult position of determining an individual’s biological sex in order to enforce the statute,” Idaho Fraternal Order of Police President Bryan Lovell wrote . “In many circumstances, there is no clear or reasonable way for officers to make that determination without engaging in questioning or investigative actions that could be viewed as invasive and inappropriate.” Three states — Utah, Florida and Kansas — have criminal bans on trans people using bathrooms that align with their gender identity, according to the Movement Advancement Project, an LGBTQ+ advocacy group. Republish this story Share Bluesky Facebook Email Recommended for you James Talarico says he opposes trans athletes in girls’ sports ‘if it risks safety or fairness’ The fight over trans girls’ sports participation moves to the November ballot Supreme Court lets states block trans athletes from women’s and girls’ sports In new documentary, Sarah McBride navigates anti-trans hate on her historic path to Congress From the Collection Collection: The 19th News Network Who cares for kids when parents work nights and weekends? Emily Tate Sullivan, The 74 · September 21 Evictions impact millions of kids. These schools get an alert when it happens to their students. Linda Jacobson, The 74 · September 16 Record high waitlists for childcare assistance have shut women out of work and promotions Sarah Carr, The Hechinger Report · September 15 Daily Newsletter A smart, relatable digest of our latest stories and top news affecting women and LGBTQ+ people. Look for a confirmation sent to Email Subscribe Did you mean ? I agree to the terms The email didn't go through. Try again with a new email or Contact us for support Become a member Explore more coverage from The 19th Politics LGBTQ+ Health Justice Caregiving View all topics Support representative journalism today. Learn more about membership . Give $19 Give $50 Give $100 Any amount Transparency About Team Contact Privacy Policy Community Guidelines Gift Acceptance Policy Financials Newsroom Latest Stories Strategic Plan 19th News Network Events Careers Fellowships Newsletters Daily The Amendment Menopause View all Support Ways to Give Sponsorship Republishing Volunteer The 19th is a reader-supported nonprofit news organization. Our stories are free to republish with these guidelines .