San Marino bans discrimination based on sexual orientation | Euronews Go to navigation Go to main content Go to search Go to footer English English Français Deutsch Italiano Español Português Polski Pусский Türkçe Ελληνικά Magyar فارسی العربية Shqip Română ქართული български Srpski BHS Newsletter Newsletters Events Events Podcasts Videos Africanews Loader Latest Trending US-Israel attack on Iran 2026 War in Ukraine Russia Pope Leo XIV Spain Ukraine Latest news No Comment Watch: mass Madrid protests over Maricarmen eviction and housing crisis No Comment Northern Ireland: 2,000 protesters block disputed Portadown march Europe News Sánchez vows housing decree amid outrage over Maricarmen eviction Europe News How neutral should Switzerland be? Voters deliver decisive verdict Europe Categories EU.XL Europe News Europe Series France United Kingdom Programmes Europe in Motion The Cube The Europe Conversation 12 minutes with Made in Europe Brussels, My Love? Euronews investigates Make it Work Smart Regions Featured Europe Today Euronews' flagship morning TV show with the news and insights that drive Europe, live from Brussels every morning at 08.00. Also available as a newsletter and podcast. The Ring The Ring is Euronews’ weekly political showdown, where Europe’s toughest debates meet their boldest voices. In each episode, two political heavyweights from across the EU face off to propose a diversity of opinions and spark conversations around the most important issues of EU affairs and the wider European political life. World Categories World Americas Middle East Africa Asia Oceania Davos Iran Greenland USA Programmes Spotlight Global Japan Euronews Witness Qatar 365 World News Euronews Debates Football Now Top News Stories Today Featured No Comment No agenda, no argument, no bias, No Comment. Get the story without commentary. EU Policy Business Categories Business Economy Markets Programmes Business Planet Energy Frontiers Focus Real Economy Start Me Up The Dialogue Target The Exchange Featured My Wildest Prediction Dare to imagine the future with business and tech visionaries The Big Question Deep dive conversations with business leaders Travel Categories Travel News Destinations Moments Residences Travel Live TV Programmes Grand Voyager Adventures Conscious Travel Explore Golf Travel Tales Notes From The Usa Soul Of The South Taste Women Beyond Borders Next Categories Tech News Money Space Work Mobility Home Artificial intelligence Programmes Dub.AI Hacker Hunter Rethink Sci-Tech Featured Euronews Tech Talks Euronews Tech Talks goes beyond discussions to explore the impact of new technologies on our lives. With explanations, engaging Q&As, and lively conversations, the podcast provides valuable insights into the intersection of technology and society. The Food Detectives Europe's best food experts are joining forces to crack down on fraud. Euronews is following them in this special series: The Food Detectives Culture Categories Culture news Style Design Art Taste Music Cinema Programmes Creators Crossing Cultures Cry Like A Boy Cult Inspire Saudi Meet The Locals Melting Pot Culture Modern Nomads Musica Scenes The Kitchen The Star Ingredient Earth Categories Earth News Nature Water EcoTech Programmes Ocean Ocean Calls The Road To Green Featured Water Matters Europe's water is under increasing pressure. Pollution, droughts, floods are taking their toll on our drinking water, lakes, rivers and coastlines. Join us on a journey around Europe to see why protecting ecosystems matters, how our wastewater can be better managed, and to discover some of the best water solutions. Video reports, an animated explainer series and live debate - find out why Water Matters, from Euronews. Climate Now We give you the latest climate facts from the world’s leading source, analyse the trends and explain how our planet is changing. We meet the experts on the front line of climate change who explore new strategies to mitigate and adapt. Health Categories Health news Healthcare Nutrition Wellbeing Programmes Smart Health Euroviews Videos More Special coverage Climate Global Japan InClassica Kazakhstan Azerbaijan Young Inventors Prize 2025 Discover Algeria Discover Türkiye Golf Travel Tales From Qatar Uzbekistan Partner content Islamic Civilization Center Be Bold. Discover Saudi Leading Edge Powering Progress Experience Brazil Italy – Heritage & Horizons Poland Untold Costa Rica Beyond Business Saadiyat Cultural District My Tokyo Kerala Tourism Dubai Global Digital Economy Hub Turkmenistan - Our story Endless Discovery Expo 2025 Osaka, Kansai, Japan Services Weather Bulletin Messaging apps Widgets & Services Online Language Courses Find Us Log In My Account Live Close menu sidebar English English Français Deutsch Italiano Español Português Polski Pусский Türkçe Ελληνικά Magyar فارسی العربية Shqip Română ქართული български Srpski BHS Latest Trending US-Israel attack on Iran 2026 War in Ukraine Russia Pope Leo XIV Spain Ukraine Latest news No Comment Watch: mass Madrid protests over Maricarmen eviction and housing crisis No Comment Northern Ireland: 2,000 protesters block disputed Portadown march Europe News Sánchez vows housing decree amid outrage over Maricarmen eviction Europe News How neutral should Switzerland be? Voters deliver decisive verdict Europe Categories EU.XL Europe News Europe Series France United Kingdom Programmes Europe in Motion The Cube The Europe Conversation 12 minutes with Made in Europe Brussels, My Love? Euronews investigates Make it Work Smart Regions Featured Europe Today Euronews' flagship morning TV show with the news and insights that drive Europe, live from Brussels every morning at 08.00. Also available as a newsletter and podcast. The Ring The Ring is Euronews’ weekly political showdown, where Europe’s toughest debates meet their boldest voices. In each episode, two political heavyweights from across the EU face off to propose a diversity of opinions and spark conversations around the most important issues of EU affairs and the wider European political life. World Categories World Americas Middle East Africa Asia Oceania Davos Iran Greenland USA Programmes Spotlight Global Japan Euronews Witness Qatar 365 World News Euronews Debates Football Now Top News Stories Today Featured No Comment No agenda, no argument, no bias, No Comment. Get the story without commentary. EU Policy Business Categories Business Economy Markets Programmes Business Planet Energy Frontiers Focus Real Economy Start Me Up The Dialogue Target The Exchange Featured My Wildest Prediction Dare to imagine the future with business and tech visionaries The Big Question Deep dive conversations with business leaders Travel Categories Travel News Destinations Moments Residences Travel Live TV Programmes Grand Voyager Adventures Conscious Travel Explore Golf Travel Tales Notes From The Usa Soul Of The South Taste Women Beyond Borders Next Categories Tech News Money Space Work Mobility Home Artificial intelligence Programmes Dub.AI Hacker Hunter Rethink Sci-Tech Featured Euronews Tech Talks Euronews Tech Talks goes beyond discussions to explore the impact of new technologies on our lives. With explanations, engaging Q&As, and lively conversations, the podcast provides valuable insights into the intersection of technology and society. The Food Detectives Europe's best food experts are joining forces to crack down on fraud. Euronews is following them in this special series: The Food Detectives Culture Categories Culture news Style Design Art Taste Music Cinema Programmes Creators Crossing Cultures Cry Like A Boy Cult Inspire Saudi Meet The Locals Melting Pot Culture Modern Nomads Musica Scenes The Kitchen The Star Ingredient Earth Categories Earth News Nature Water EcoTech Programmes Ocean Ocean Calls The Road To Green Featured Water Matters Europe's water is under increasing pressure. Pollution, droughts, floods are taking their toll on our drinking water, lakes, rivers and coastlines. Join us on a journey around Europe to see why protecting ecosystems matters, how our wastewater can be better managed, and to discover some of the best water solutions. Video reports, an animated explainer series and live debate - find out why Water Matters, from Euronews. Climate Now We give you the latest climate facts from the world’s leading source, analyse the trends and explain how our planet is changing. We meet the experts on the front line of climate change who explore new strategies to mitigate and adapt. Health Categories Health news Healthcare Nutrition Wellbeing Programmes Smart Health Euroviews Videos More Special coverage Climate Global Japan InClassica Kazakhstan Azerbaijan Young Inventors Prize 2025 Discover Algeria Discover Türkiye Golf Travel Tales From Qatar Uzbekistan Partner content Islamic Civilization Center Be Bold. Discover Saudi Leading Edge Powering Progress Experience Brazil Italy – Heritage & Horizons Poland Untold Costa Rica Beyond Business Saadiyat Cultural District My Tokyo Kerala Tourism Dubai Global Digital Economy Hub Turkmenistan - Our story Endless Discovery Expo 2025 Osaka, Kansai, Japan Services Weather Bulletin Messaging apps Widgets & Services Online Language Courses Newsletter Newsletters Events Events Podcasts Videos Africanews Loader Find Us Advertisement News World SanMarino San Marino bans discrimination based on sexual orientation The small Republic of San Marino, situated on the Italian peninsula. Copyright By Viola Stefanello Published on 04/06/2019 - 10:11 GMT+2 • Updated 12:57 Share Comments Add Euronews on Google Share Facebook Twitter Flipboard Send Reddit Linkedin Messenger Telegram VK Bluesky Threads Whatsapp Citizens of San Marino have voted by referendum to insert a clause prohibiting discrimination based on sexual orientation in their country's constitution Citizens of San Marino, one of Europe's smallest countries, have chosen to ban discrimination based on sexual discrimination by constitution. The motion passed with 71.46% of votes in a referendum on Sunday. ADVERTISEMENT ADVERTISEMENT The enclave state, home to around 33,500 people and independent since 301 AD (CE), has become the eleventh country in the world to include LGBT rights directly into its constitution, joining the UK, Sweden, Portugal, Malta, Bolivia, Ecuador, New Zealand, Mexico, South African and the Fiji Islands. The result of the referendum means that article 4 of the San Marino constitution, listing all the specifications on which the principle of equality applies before the law, will now include the clause "without any discrimination on the base of sexual orientation". The measure is the latest step in San Marino's evolving attitude towards LGBT rights. Until 2004, homosexuality in the country was punishable with 3 to 12 months of jail time. In 2018, the parliament passed a law legalising civil unions for same-sex couples. Repubblica di San Marino e diritti LGBT: Referendum costituzionale introduce il divieto di discriminazione per... Publiée par Marco Tonti sur Lundi 3 juin 2019 "It's a huge success, backed by a popular and conscious vote", wrote Italian LGBT activist Marco Tonti, who has been working in collaboration with advocates in San Marino since the law on civil unions, on Facebook. "I hope this exceptional success acts as a sign and a warning outside of the borders of San Marino, especially for Italy". "We hope that this success is only the first step of a popular season full of recognition of new rights on all fronts, animated by a profound and fruitful debate, starting with the law proposal on voluntary interruption of pregnancy that will soon be discussed, up to equally fundamental issues such as end of life treatment", commented the committee that pushed for the law on civil unions in 2018 in a press release. The Christian Democrats, San Marino's main conservative party, did not take a stand on the referendum. Do you want more news? Go to accessibility shortcuts Share Comments Add Euronews on Google Read more Bautzen Pride goes ahead under police guard after threats Watch: Runners race in towering heels at Madrid Pride event German Chancellor Merz faces Pride flag fallout after saying Bundestag 'not a circus' LGBT San Marino sexuality Discrimination Comments ADVERTISEMENT ADVERTISEMENT Top stories IRGC claims, US denies seizure of underwater US drone in Hormuz Five arrested near US air base as police probe possible Iran link Poland and Lithuania preparing cross-border evacuation plan EU tells capitals to cut gas demand amid rising supply concerns Etna erupts again: chaos at Catania airport, risk of higher air fares ADVERTISEMENT ADVERTISEMENT Most read 1 Five arrested near US air base as police probe possible Iran link 2 Russian foreign minister rejects Berlin's call to abandon escalation 3 Fat Bear Week returns as Alaska's biggest bears compete for the crown 4 Trump rejects Iranian plan to reopen Strait of Hormuz 5 Thousands take to the streets in Madrid over Ceuta migrant crisis ADVERTISEMENT ADVERTISEMENT Loader Search Browse today's tags US-Israel attack on Iran 2026 War in Ukraine Russia Pope Leo XIV Spain Ukraine France Germany Madrid EU Policy United Kingdom Protest Themes Europe World Business EU Policy Earth Next Health Travel Culture Videos Programmes Our journalists Archive Services Live Bulletin Weather Latest Apps Messaging apps Widgets & Services Africanews Online Language Courses More About Euronews Commercial Services Terms and Conditions Cookie Policy Privacy Policy Transparency Contact Work at Euronews Accessibility: non-compliant Modify my cookies choices Follow us Newsletters Copyright © euronews 2026