Botswana: Draft constitutional changes include intersex rights - but other challenges remain Skip to content Menu Search Home What we do Practice areas Equality, Inclusion & Freedom from Violence Access to Knowledge, Information Integrity & Media Viability Responsible AI, Platform Accountability & Technology-Facilitated Harms Climate Justice & Sustainability Inclusive Markets & Fair Competition Multilateralism & the Rule of Law Ethical Leadership, Good Governance & Viable Systems Advisory Advisory Services Stakeholder Engagement & Public Participation Project Management & Events Law Reform & Advocacy Human Rights Impact Assessments Regulatory Compliance & Risk Responsible AI Adoption Policy Development Development of Legal Instruments Research Services Commissioned Research Comparative Research & Mapping Training Services Capacity Building Workshops Online Platforms & Courses Training Toolkits & Manuals Strategy Strategic Development Funder Engagement & Fundraising Management Consulting Learning & Impact (M&E) Organisational Structuring Culture Curation Media Technology Services Website Development Hosting IT Support Systems Integration Communications & Design Services Communications Strategy Content Development Coaching & Media Training Design Legal Strategic & Test Case Litigation Dispute Resolution & Accountability Mechanisms Social Enterprise & Non-Profit Structuring Visit Power Law Africa Who we are About us About us Why we exist Our vision The Private-Public Interest Law Model (PPILM) Empowerment Our history Our work Our impact Current projects Previous projects People (A-O) Claire Dehosse | JHB Murray Hunter | CPT S’lindile Khumalo | JHB Tim Lloyd | CPT Siphathisiwe Mncube | JHB Lawrence Mute | NBO Kwazi Nwana | JHB People (P-Z) Michael Power | JHB Tina Power | JHB Jessie Rashid | JHB Sophie Smit | JHB Andrew Songa | NBO Wendy Trott | JHB Dércio Tsandzana | MPM Special Projects Opportunities Connect Close Menu 18 June 2024 Botswana: Draft constitutional changes include intersex rights – but other challenges remain Same-sex relationships remain criminalised in the majority of countries in Africa. Yet recent years have seen a surge of new policy efforts in several regions to stifle members of the LGBTQIA+ community and allies. During Pride Month 2024, ALT Advisory and Power and Associates are spotlighting some recent law and policy developments on the continent – both positive and negative – in allyship with members of LGBTQIA+ communities. This is the second in our Pride 2024 Series . In March 2024, Kabo Morawaeng, Botswana’s Minister for State President, introduced a constitutional amendment bill which includes new protection against discrimination for intersex persons and people with disabilities in the Constitution. (The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2024 , follows a Commission-led review process of the Constitution, and introduces a range of other amendments, including restricting retired presidents from holding other high offices, barring dual citizens from election to the National Assembly, and changing the make-up of the Judicial Services Commission.) The relevant provision of the Bill would substitute section 15(3) of the Constitution, providing the grounds for protection from discrimination on the basis of a person’s: ..race, tribe, place of origin, political opinions, colour, creed, disability or sex ( including intersex )… During further deliberations on the bill in June 2024, the Minister of Labour and Home Affairs noted the importance of legislators differentiating between “intersex” and “same-sex” and how the two should not be used interchangeably. While civic groups have raised considerable concerns with the broader constitutional review process, the proposed protection for intersex persons suggests a positive momentum towards better LGBTQI+ protections in Botswana. It follows the 2021 landmark decision of Attorney General of Botswana v Letsweletse Motshidiemang (civil appeal no. CACGB 157-19), in which the Court of Appeal upheld a High Court judgment decriminalising same-sex relations. The court found that provisions of the Penal Code prohibiting consensual same-sex relations were unconstitutional and amount to a breach of the rights to liberty, dignity, privacy, and equality. The Penal Code carried a maximum sentence of seven years. Further, the Court of Appeal endorsed the view that the definition of “sex” as a prohibited grounds for discrimination in section 15 of the Constitution should be read to include both “sexual orientation” and “gender identity.” Unfortunately, the broader constitutional amendment process has drawn opposition from civil society groups, with the Botswana Council of Non-Governmental Organisations (BONGO) petitioning the National Assembly to withdraw the Bill , on grounds that are not related to its provisions relating to intersex persons. Rather, the petitioners express deep concern that other constitutional changes in the Bill violate the separation of powers and that the process itself has lacked transparency and meaningful participation. (The full text of the Bill has not been widely available to the public.) The Bill is scheduled for a third reading in Parliament in September 2024 , and would require a two-thirds majority to pass. Batswana are scheduled to head to the polls for a general election in October 2024. The legal status of LGBTQIA rights in Botswana In general, Botswana is considered to be heading towards better protections for LGBTQIA+ rights, comparative to other countries in Africa. Unfortunately, same-sex marriage is not recognised in Botswana. There have, however, been several positive developments in the last decade. In 2010, Botswana became one of the few countries in the region to amend its Employment Act to prohibit discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. In 2016, in Attorney General of Botswana v Rammoage and 19 Others (civil appeal no. CACGB 128-14), the Court of Appeal ruled that LEGABIBO could be formally registered as a society, marking a positive step in upholding freedom of expression and association for the LGBTQIA+ community. In 2017, the High Court ruled in favour of a transgender man, ordering the Registrar of National Registration to change the gender marker from female to male in the applicant’s official documentation. Shortly after the Motshidiemang judgment was handed down, President Mokgweetsi Masisi assured members of the LGBTQIA+ community that the government would respect the court’s decision and enhance inclusion. CSOs have undertaken much of the work of conscientising members of the general public about LGBTQIA+ rights, including intersex rights. For example, the Rainbow Identity Association recently engaged with traditional leaders about LGBTQIA+ rights given their role in influencing attitudinal responses in their communities as well as their political influence. Afrobarometer findings suggest a slow upwards trend in acceptance of LGBTQI+ persons in Botswana, with 50% of respondents in 2021 saying they would either approve or not care if they had a LGBTQIA+ neighbour, up from 43% in 2014 . There is significant room for further progress. As the Court noted in Rammoage , “Members of the gay, lesbian, and transgender community, although no doubt a small minority, […] form part of the rich diversity of any nation and are fully entitled in Botswana, as in any other progress state, to the constitutional protection of their dignity.” In-country organisations and networks For further resources and information, here are a few of the organisations that protect LGBTQIA+ rights in Botswana: LEGABIBO is an NGO seeking to protect the rights of LGBTQIA+ persons, primarily focusing on community access to clinic health services. Further, LEGABIBO offers free consultations with human rights lawyers and paralegals associated with the organisation. Success Capital Organisation is a grassroots youth-led LGBTQIA+ body which seeks to strengthen human rights using three pillars. First, participatory decolonised knowledge production; second, peer-to-peer systemic knowledge sharing; and third, supporting civic action and participation. Further information The Constitution (Amendment) Bill, 2024, is accessible here . The Motshidiemang appeal judgment is accessible here . End GBV Africa, an ALT Special Project, maps law and policy trends relating to GBV, including LGBTQI+ rights: endgbv.africa The information contained in this note is for general guidance on matters of interest and does not constitute legal advice. For any enquiries, please contact us at [email protected] . Research: Regulation of AI through Data Protection Thailand: Bill legalising same sex marriage passed by the senate Related Posts Advisory , Advisory Notes , Practice Areas Conducting an indepedent impact evaluation of the Tanzania Legal Information Institute (TanzLII) Advisory , Advisory Notes , Practice Areas Contributing to the Glass Ceilings 2026: Women in South African Media Report Advisory , Advisory Notes , Practice Areas Researching threats to media freedom in South Africa MAKE. CHANGE. POSSIBLE. Latest Advisory Notes Conducting an indepedent impact evaluation of the Tanzania Legal Information Institute (TanzLII) 08 September 2026 Contributing to the Glass Ceilings 2026: Women in South African Media Report 07 August 2026 Researching threats to media freedom in South Africa 29 July 2026 Insights: The European Court of Justice affirms the right to fair remuneration for publishers 19 May 2026 Back To Top Accessibility Ethical Practices Legal Non-discrimination PAIA Manual Privacy Sitemap LinkedIn Instagram Threads YouTube General enquiries: [email protected] | Switchboard: +27(0)10 822 7860 We work in association with: MAKE. CHANGE. POSSIBLE. Copyright © 2017 - ALT Advisory (Pty) Ltd is a private company registered in the Republic of South Africa (Reg. No.: 2017/145368/07 | VAT No.: 4310284726). It is a member of the ALT Impact Group. All rights reserved. This website was developed with ♥ by ALT Media , a division of ALT Advisory . * Power & Associates Inc. (t/a Power Law Africa) is an independently registered law firm, which works in association with ALT Advisory. Kindly note that some of the images on this site are AI-generated. If you're still reading this you must be bored. Book a visit and we'll have a cup of coffee. Manage Cookie Consent This website uses cookies to improve your experience while you navigate through the website. Out of these cookies, the cookies that are categorised as necessary are stored on your browser as they are essential for the basic functionalities of the website. We also use third-party cookies that help us analyse and understand how you use this website. These cookies will be stored in your browser only with your consent. You also have the option to opt-out of these cookies. Opting out of some of these cookies may have an effect on your browsing experience. Necessary Necessary Always active Necessary cookies are essential for the website to function properly. This category only includes cookies that ensures basic functionalities and security features of the website. These cookies do not store any personal information. Preferences Preferences The technical storage or access is necessary for the legitimate purpose of storing preferences that are not requested by the subscriber or user. Analytics Analytics Analytics cookies are used to track user behaviour on our website. We process these cookies to understand user engagement and improve user experience on our website. The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for anonymous statistical purposes. Without a subpoena, voluntary compliance on the part of your Internet Service Provider, or additional records from a third party, information stored or retrieved for this purpose alone cannot usually be used to identify you. Marketing Marketing The technical storage or access is required to create user profiles to send advertising, or to track the user on a website or across several websites for similar marketing purposes. Manage options Manage services Manage {vendor_count} vendors Read more about these purposes Accept Deny View preferences Save preferences View preferences {title} {title} {title} Privacy & Cookies Policy