Tajikistan | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Tajikistan At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Legal Gender Recognition Possible? Yes LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? Yes Last Update: March 12, 2026 Since Tajikistan gained independence from the former USSR bloc in 1991, the criminal code has not contained any provision outlawing consensual same-sex sexual acts between adults. However, the country has not enacted legal nondiscrimination protections based on sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, or sex characteristics. There is no transparent procedure for legal gender recognition in the country, but at least two trans men and one trans woman were able to change their gender markers on official documents in 2023 through a court procedure. Nonconsensual medical interventions on intersex people remain legal. Sexual and gender minorities frequently face discrimination and violence at the hands of both the authorities and the general public. In 2024, the Eurasian Coalition on Health, Rights, Gender and Sexual Diversity recorded 27 cases of human rights violations against LGBT people. Police have subjected LGBT individuals to arbitrary arrests and other forms of violence , including blackmail, extortion, and sexual assault. In 2017, the government reportedly created a special registry of “proven” LGBT persons in the country, comprising over 300 individuals. While supposedly aimed at protecting people of queer experience and stopping the spread of sexually transmissible infections, such a registry exposes these communities to increased risks of violence and persecution. There have also been cases of law enforcement using Article 125 of the criminal code, which prohibits the intentional transmission of HIV, to detain and extort sexual and gender minorities, and force them to out other queer people. In 2021, Tajikistan was ranked by the Williams Institute as the second worst out of 175 countries for average social acceptance of LGBTI people between 2017 and 2020. Influential religious leaders have publicly opposed what they describe as “nontraditional sexual relations.” Although there is no explicit legal ban on the registration of LGBTIQ organizations in Tajikistan, the state prevents the registration of such organizations in practice , citing the “unacceptability” of the subject matter or other justifications directly or indirectly related to sexual orientation. From 2022 to 2023, the government dissolved over 700 NGOs, including “Equal Opportunity,” the only NGO specifically working on LGBTIQ equality in the country. Anti-LGBTIQ rhetoric and policies and deeply ingrained gender inequalities create specific challenges for lesbian, bisexual, and queer (LBQ) women in the country, who face “widespread deliberate silence” and rights violations. Over half of LBQ respondents to a 2024 needs assessment by an Outright grantee reported that they did not feel safe, while 72 percent reported a need for mental health services in the previous year. Broader crackdowns on civil liberties may have negative impacts on sexual and gender minorities. In 2024, the president amended the law on “traditions” to regulate clothing and enforce compliance with “national culture,” but in practice, they created a mechanism for controlling citizens’ bodies and self-expression. Campaigns preceding these amendments to force women to wear “proper” headscarves and men to shave their beards, as well as cases of denial of medical care, arbitrary detentions, and forced identification, demonstrate that state standards of appearance are, in fact, used as a tool of control . View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International