Where Violence Against Women is Rampant | Human Rights Watch Skip to cookie privacy notice Skip to main content العربية 简中 繁中 English Français Deutsch 日本語 Português Русский Español More languages Search Donate Now Countries Topics Reports Videos & Photos Impact About Join Us Give Now Close Search Search Primary navigation Countries Africa All Africa African Union Angola Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Central African Republic Chad Côte d'Ivoire Democratic Republic of Congo Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini (formerly Swaziland) Ethiopia Gambia Ghana Guinea Kenya Liberia Malawi Mali Mauritius Mozambique Niger Nigeria Rwanda Senegal Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Americas All Americas Argentina Bolivia Brazil Canada Chile Colombia Costa Rica Cuba Dominican Republic Ecuador El Salvador Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Uruguay Venezuela Asia All Asia Afghanistan Australia Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China and Tibet Fiji India Indonesia Japan Laos Malaysia Maldives Myanmar (Burma) Nauru Nepal North Korea Pakistan Papua New Guinea Philippines Singapore South Korea Sri Lanka Taiwan Thailand Timor-Leste Vietnam Europe/Central Asia All Europe/Central Asia Albania Armenia Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czech Republic Denmark European Union France Georgia Germany Greece Holy See Hungary Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Latvia Lithuania Netherlands Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia Serbia/Kosovo Spain Sweden Switzerland Tajikistan Türkiye Turkmenistan Ukraine United Kingdom Uzbekistan Middle East/North Africa All Middle East/North Africa Algeria Bahrain Egypt Iran Iraq Israel/Palestine Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Libya Mauritania Morocco/Western Sahara Oman Qatar Saudi Arabia Syria Tunisia United Arab Emirates Yemen United States All United States Criminal Justice Democracy Economic Justice Immigrants’ Rights and Border Policy Racial Justice US Foreign Policy Topics Arms Cluster Munitions Killer Robots Landmines Explosive Weapons in Populated Areas Incendiary Weapons Children's Rights Education Attacks on Education Children Separated from Families Children and Armed Conflict Child Labor Youth Justice Migrant and Refugee Children Intersex Children Crisis and Conflict Disability Rights Shackling Economic Justice and Rights Corporate Accountability Poverty and Inequality Environment and Human Rights Climate Change Deforestation Fossil Fuels Free Speech Press Freedom Religious Freedom Health Sexual and Reproductive Health Detention Centers Disasters and Displaced Populations Environment and Health Health Care Access HIV/AIDS and Tuberculosis Palliative Care Attacks on Health LGBT Rights Refugees and Migrants Asylum Seekers Internally Displaced People Exploitation, Forced Labor & Trafficking Rights of Older People International Justice International Criminal Court Peace and Justice Sport and Human Rights Technology and Rights Digital Investigations Lab Terrorism / Counterterrorism CIA Activities Detention without Trial Edward Snowden Guantanamo Guantanamo - Military Commissions Targeted Killings and Drones Torture United Nations Human Rights Council Women's Rights Forced Marriage Gender Based Violence Domestic Workers Gender Equality Reproductive Rights Sexual Violence Labor Rights Sex Work Women and Armed Conflict Women’s Health Reports Video & Photos Impact Join Us Newsletters Our Committees Film Festival Legacies for Justice About About Us History Newsletters Careers People Board of Directors Advisory Committees Social Media Human Rights Education Partners Partner Resources Financials and Fundraising Policy Accessibility Contact Give Now Make a One-time Gift Give Monthly Gifts in Wills and Trusts Matching Gifts Partners for Justice Stock or Wire Transfer Give from Your IRA Donate Now Search Search English Choose your language Close العربية 简中 繁中 English Français Deutsch 日本語 Português Русский Español More Languages Donate Now Open the main menu Trending Russia-Ukraine War Israel/Palestine Trump Administration and Human Rights Crisis in the Middle East International Criminal Court Would you like to see a version of this page that loads faster by showing text only? Yes No, don't ask again ✕ Close Human Rights Watch Where Violence Against Women is Rampant Print Donate Now January 27, 2009 3:11PM EST | Commentary Where Violence Against Women is Rampant Published in: The Huffington Post Share this via Facebook Share this via Bluesky Share this via X Share this via WhatsApp Share this via Email More sharing options Share this via LinkedIn Share this via Reddit Share this via Telegram Share this via Printer Papua New Guinea has made the international news again with a horrific story to reinforce stereotypes about the country: sorcery, sex, and fire. On January 6, a group of men reportedly stripped a woman naked, bound her hands and feet, stuffed a cloth in her mouth, and burned her alive on a dumpsite. Rumor has it that she had "confessed" to having eaten a man's heart. But in all likelihood, this will turn out to be a more typical story from that country: a brutal killing of a woman that goes unprosecuted, unpunished, and forgotten. In Papua New Guinea, research indicates, two-thirds of women experience domestic violence, and 50 percent of women have experienced forced sex. The Australian development agency AUSAID just issued a new report identifying violence against women as a major barrier to Papua New Guinea's development. Papua New Guinea officials are going to have to take the lead to solve the problem, but with a new administration in Washington that is expected to take a stronger stand on women's issues, this may be a good time to bring international pressures to bear on countries where unpunished violence against women is routine. The truth in the latest case may be more like what happened almost exactly one year before. Only a few yards away from a police station, a mob stripped a woman naked, beat and poked her with hot iron rods, and set on her on fire. The accusation: that she was possessed by spirits that she used to chop off a man's tongue. The story that came out later: the man went to her house, tried to rape her, and in the struggle she bit off part of his tongue. The next day he accused her of witchcraft. Provincial police commanders in two highlands provinces told journalists that there were more than 50 sorcery-related killings in their provinces in 2008, but the perpetrators of such killings are rarely brought to justice. The problem is also complicated. Many people believe in sorcery and practicing it is a crime that can be brought to village courts. The phenomenon has links to the country's HIV epidemic -- 1.5 percent of the country's 6.5 million people are infected. Many villagers -- particularly those in remote communities where the virus has reached but information, testing, and treatment have not -- may suspect sorcery when someone dies from the disease. But allegations of sorcery are far too often used to hide ordinary murders. Blaming the victim just makes it a little easier for the police to take no action. Even if charges are brought and someone is convicted, claims that the victim practiced sorcery can be used to mitigate a murder sentence, officials from the Law Reform Commission have said. Some of the most disturbing cases I've documented involved police: police rapes of a 7 year-old girl in 2005 and a 6 year-old in 2006 attracted public outrage but no conviction. Women and girls I interviewed said the police had asked them for sex when they tried to report a crime. A woman who told me the police raped her in a police station in 2005 said, ""When I see any cop car, I walk off. I'm scared. I don't trust any cop nowadays." Police have also raped women and girls when they are locked in police cells. There are some people who are trying to do something about the situation, but they need more support. Dame Carol Kidu, a member of Parliament, presented petition to the Parliament on violence against women signed by more than 4,000 people. The Catholic Church in one province reportedly warned Catholics that they would be excommunicated if they attacked people accused of practicing sorcery. Promisingly, the nation's police commissioner has started publicly condemning violence against women and promising to do what he can to address domestic and sexual violence. But much more work needs to be done to translate outrage and public condemnation into actual protection for women. The prime minister has made a few statements condemning the violence but has taken little action to address the problem. Women's rights groups rallied without success around the 2005 disappearance of a noted women's rights activist, Anna Benny, who was allegedly shot and killed after she went to the assistance of her sister-in-law, who was being held in a home on suspicion of practicing sorcery. The police in Goroka refused to investigate her death, claiming they had received no complaint from the family. It is time to unmask the sensationalism from these horrific cases and to treat these cases for what they are: murders that demand thorough police investigation and prosecution. Public information campaigns, including dispelling myths about HIV, can help. Victims of violence need medical, legal, counseling, and other support services, including police protection and shelters when they are threatened at home. Australia, which gives considerable aid to the police in Papua New Guinea, should press its government harder to strengthen internal police discipline and to punish officers who turn a blind eye to violence against women, including violence committed with the flimsy excuse of defense against sorcery. And the world needs to keep watching. In this month's sorcery case, the police promised to investigate and the Law Commission promised new legislation on sorcery. But if it's like every other case, tomorrow this may all be forgotten. Zama Coursen-Neff is Deputy Director for the Children's Rights Division of Human Rights Watch. Your tax deductible gift can help stop human rights violations and save lives around the world. $50 $100 $250 $500 $1000 Other $ Donate Now Region / Country Asia Papua New Guinea Topic Women's Rights Gender Based Violence Sexual Violence More Reading September 23, 2026 Commentary South Korea’s Systemic Gender and Age Discrimination September 22, 2026 Report Myanmar: Women Political Prisoners Tortured, Ill-treated Reports September 8, 2026 Report Too Old and A Woman Systemic Age and Gender Discrimination Against Women at Work in South Korea October 10, 2024 Report Double Betrayal Abuses against Afghan Policewomen, Past and Present More Reading September 23, 2026 Commentary South Korea’s Systemic Gender and Age Discrimination September 22, 2026 Report Myanmar: Women Political Prisoners Tortured, Ill-treated Most Viewed January 15, 2026 Report Syria: Accountability Lacking for Sweida Abuses June 14, 2018 News Release Africa: Pregnant Girls, Young Mothers Barred from School September 8, 2016 News Release Nepal: Child Marriage Threatens Girls’ Futures May 17, 2021 Report “Years Don’t Wait for Them” September 27, 2026 Report Syria: Reconstruction Deals Lack Critical Rights Framework Share this via Facebook Share this via Bluesky Share this via X Share this via WhatsApp Share this via Email More sharing options Share this via LinkedIn Share this via Reddit Share this via Telegram Share this via Printer Protecting Rights, Saving Lives Human Rights Watch defends the rights of people in close to 100 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justice Donate Now Get updates on human rights issues from around the globe. Join our movement today. Enter an email address Leave blank Leave blank Leave blank Processing.. Thank you for signing up! An error occurred while subscribing your email address. Please try again. Get Updates On Rights Issues Worldwide Leave blank Leave blank Leave blank Sign Up Connect With Us BlueSky X Facebook YouTube Instagram LinkedIn TikTok Footer menu Contact Us Corrections Privacy Policy Permissions Site Map Child Safeguarding Text Version © 2026 Human Rights Watch Human Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700 Human Rights Watch is a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808 Human Rights Watch