Termination of local jurisdiction in the procedure of gender change data | GOV.SI Skip to main content GOV.SI Search Open navigation menu Close navigation menu Policies State Authorities Registries Events News About the website Search English Choose language Slovenščina English Deutsch Español Français Magyar Italiano 日本語 Polski Português Slovenčina Shqip Srpski Українська Home News Termination of local jurisdiction in the procedure of gender change data 29. 10. 2022 Ministry of the Interior Transgender persons are no longer to be exposed to involuntary disclosure of transgender identity in the local environment. Transgender persons are no longer to be exposed to involuntary disclosure of transgender identity in the local environment | Author Shutterstock.com The Ministry of the Interior observed the recommendation of the Advocate of the Principle of Equality and abolished the local jurisdiction in the procedure of gender change data and entry of gender reassignment in the civil register. The procedure may now take place at any administrative unit. The transgender person supplying their gender change data to the administrative unit of their registered residence is thus not subject to involuntary disclosure of transgender identity in their local environment. The latter can lead to stigmatisation and discrimination. Since the establishment of the civil register (3 May 2005), 157 gender reassignments have been entered in the civil register, including 31 this year. The amendment to the Decree on administrative operations entered into force on 22 October 2022. Did you find the information you were looking for? YES NO Feedback form Help us improve this website. Characters remaining: 1000 Please do not include any personal information (for example, your first name, last name or email address). If you would like to receive a response from the responsible institution, you will have this option after clicking the Send button. Close Thank you for your response. Do you want to receive a response from the responsible institution? Clicking on the button will open your default e-mail program and automatically draft a message that you can send to the institution responsible for the content of this website. Ask for a reply Responsible institution: Government Communication Office | +386 1 478 50 00 | is.vog@moku.pg Last edited: 3. 11. 2022 © 2026 GOV.SI Na vrh strani... Search Search Close search Choose language Slovenščina English Deutsch Español Français Magyar Italiano 日本語 Polski Português Slovenčina Shqip Srpski Українська Close language selection menu