Judge rules Scottish guidance for housing trans prisoners is unlawful - BBC News BBC Homepage Skip to content Accessibility Help Your account Home News Sport Earth Reel Worklife Travel Culture Future Music TV Weather Sounds More menu More menu Search BBC Home News Sport Earth Reel Worklife Travel Culture Future Music TV Weather Sounds Close menu BBC News Menu Home Climate World UK Business Tech Science Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures More BBC Verify Newsbeat Scotland Scotland Politics Scotland Business Edinburgh, Fife & East Glasgow & West Highlands & Islands NE, Orkney & Shetland South Tayside & Central Judge rules Scottish guidance for housing trans prisoners is unlawful Image source, PA Media By Iona Young BBC Scotland News Published 19 June 2026 A judge has ruled that prison guidance which allows some transgender prisoners to be held in jails matching their gender identity, rather than their sex at birth, is unlawful. Judge Lady Ross said , external sex segregation in prisons must be based on biological sex, based on a Supreme Court ruling on the definition of a woman in equality law in April last year. Campaign group For Women Scotland challenged the Scottish government guidance through a judicial review, saying only those born biologically female should be held in the women's estate. Lawyers for the government had argued this would breach transgender prisoners' human rights. The first minister said they will take time to consider the judgement. Lady Ross said the guidance was "in conflict with the requirement that prison accommodation be provided separately for men and women" and constituted "a mis-statement of the law". She said: "In all the circumstances, the prisons guidance is unlawful." Is there a lack of clarity around UK's gender laws? Published 20 February 2025 'Blanket rule' for trans prisoners would violate rights, ministers to argue Published 20 January Suicide risk if trans prisoners are put in jails based on sex at birth, court told Published 5 February Currently the Scottish Prison Service (SPS) uses a system of individual risk assessments which aims to keep anyone who poses a danger to women out of the female estate. However, it does allow for circumstances where trans women - born biologically male - could be housed alongside women if they are deemed not to pose an unacceptable risk to them. The Supreme Court ruling emphasised that all prisoners retain rights under the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR), including transgender prisoners. It accepted that Article 8, which protects private and family life, is engaged in decisions about prison accommodation. However, the court said Article 8 does not mean there is automatically a right for a transgender prisoner to be housed in a prison designated for the opposite biological sex. Lady Ross said the right was qualified and may be restricted where there is a legitimate justification, including maintaining sex-based segregation within the prison estate. The judge acknowledged that exceptional circumstances could arise. In a case involving a serious threat to life, such as a risk of suicide, Article 2 of the ECHR — which protects the right to life — might require consideration of whether accommodation in a prison for the opposite biological sex was necessary. Image source, PA Media Image caption, Co-directors of For Women Scotland (left to right) Susan Smith, Marion Calder and Trina Budge outside Parliament House in Edinburgh For Women Scotland brought the case following its successful appeal to the Supreme Court about the definition of a woman in the Equality Act. Susan Smith, a co-director of the group, said it was "delighted" to have won a "comprehensive victory". "We hope that, in future, the Scottish government will start to listen to us rather than the lobby groups who drafted these policies and have so egregiously misled MSPs and MPs," she said. "We should never have needed to take this case and we hope this will be the last time that we are forced to go to law to defend the rights of women." Image source, PA Media Image caption, Swinney said the government need time to consider the implications of the judgement First Minister, John Swinney told BBC Scotland Lady Ross's judgement was complex and the government will take time to consider its implications. He said: "We will consider all of these details because there are complex issues that are involved, but at this early stage I acknowledge the outcome of the judgement from Lady Ross and the government will consider its findings. "We will assess the implications the judgement has on carrying out policy in relation to the handling of prisoners. "The government will do that work and respond accordingly to the judgement that has been made." Scottish Conservative equalities spokesperson Meghan Gallacher said the SNP had "failed" to implement the Supreme Court ruling. She urged John Swinney to rule out defending any further gender self-ID policies in court and to implement the verdict across public bodies. Related topics Scotland Scottish government Women's rights LGBT Women Transgender people The video playlist Watch our pick of standout clips from across the BBC Previous Next 1:31 The ups and downs of SpaceX's Starship test flights. 00:01:31, play video The ups and downs of SpaceX's Starship test flights 1:18 At the scene of counter-terrorism operation near RAF Fairford. 00:01:18, play video At the scene of counter-terrorism operation near RAF Fairford 0:39 Hundreds block Orange Order march in Northern Ireland. 00:00:39, play video Hundreds block Orange Order march in Northern Ireland 0:56 PM proposes NHS style social care system for England. 00:00:56, play video PM proposes NHS style social care system for England 1:13 Buckingham Palace hosts dance lessons. 00:01:13, play video Buckingham Palace hosts dance lessons 1:03 Is Labour's housing scheme a new idea, or an old Tory one? 00:01:03, play video Is Labour's housing scheme a new idea, or an old Tory one? 0:55 How to win an aura battle. 00:00:55, play video How to win an aura battle 1:35 The peculiar way Poirot got his walk. 00:01:35, play video The peculiar way Poirot got his walk 1:27 Could Manchester City lose some of its trophies? 00:01:27, play video Could Manchester City lose some of its trophies? 1:30 Using AI to detect fake goods online. 00:01:30, play video Using AI to detect fake goods online 0:47 'They've behaved so badly' says Man City fan. 00:00:47, play video 'They've behaved so badly' says Man City fan 1:10 Is it OK to take an iced coffee to a job interview? 00:01:10, play video Is it OK to take an iced coffee to a job interview? 1:09 What are the charges against Man City? 00:01:09, play video What are the charges against Man City? 0:35 Rory Stewart on his viral Newsnight moment. 00:00:35, play video Rory Stewart on his viral Newsnight moment 1:08 Why is the Pope in France? 00:01:08, play video Why is the Pope in France? 0:47 Should we ban the word 'awesome'? 00:00:47, play video Should we ban the word 'awesome'? 1:37 Question Time panel clash over welfare policy. 00:01:37, play video Question Time panel clash over welfare policy Top stories Five arrested as counter-terror police investigate major incident near RAF Fairford Published 1 hour ago What we know about RAF Fairford counter-terror probe Published 1 hour ago Burnham proposes NHS-style social care system for England Published 7 hours ago More to explore Celebrity Traitors 2 cast: Who are this year's 'big dogs' and dark horses? I was born while my mother was in an iron lung Killer Christa Pike to be executed within days - but her defence say she's a victim too Child's hidden letter found after 44 years I was angry at my husband - I didn't know he had dementia School holiday fines climb despite growing backlash 'Our wedding present left us gutted': Couple join dozens in car seller dispute US Politics Unspun: Cut through the noise with Anthony Zurcher's newsletter Could an iced coffee freeze you out of the job market? Elsewhere on the BBC Anne Hathaway and Jessica Chastain star in a psychological thriller How many dead people are on the internet? The hit podcast explores Thomas More's iconic text 'Utopia' Was Colin Norris wrongly convicted of killing his patients? Most read 1 Five arrested as counter-terror police investigate major incident near RAF Fairford 2 What we know about RAF Fairford counter-terror probe 3 Burnham proposes NHS-style social care system for England 4 No handshakes between Republic of Ireland and Israel 5 Ten NHS staff removed over Noah Woods data breach 6 Orange Order march row goes to heart of ongoing divisions in Northern Ireland 7 Two mass shootings in South Africa leave 27 dead 8 Killer Christa Pike to be executed within days - but her defence say she's a victim too 9 Celebrity Traitors 2 cast: Who are this year's 'big dogs' and dark horses? 10 Traitors star burgled after sharing holiday photos BBC News Services On your mobile On smart speakers Get news alerts Contact BBC News Home News Sport Earth Reel Worklife Travel Culture Future Music TV Weather Sounds Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Careers BBC emails for you Advertise with us Copyright © 2026 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.