Outcry as Azerbaijan police launch crackdown on LGBT community | Azerbaijan | The Guardian Skip to main content Skip to navigation Close dialogue 1 / 1 Next image Previous image Toggle caption Print subscriptions Search jobs Sign in Eur Europe edition UK edition US edition Australia edition International edition The Guardian - Back to home The Guardian News Opinion Sport Culture Lifestyle Show more Hide expanded menu News View all News World news UK news Climate crisis Ukraine Environment Science Global development Football Tech Business Obituaries Opinion View all Opinion The Guardian view Columnists Cartoons Opinion videos Letters Sport View all Sport Football Cricket Rugby union Tennis Cycling F1 Golf US sports Culture View all Culture Books Music TV & radio Art & design Film Games Classical Stage Lifestyle View all Lifestyle Fashion Food Recipes Love & sex Health & fitness Home & garden Women Men Family Travel Money Search input google-search Search Support us Print subscriptions Search jobs Holidays Digital Archive Guardian Licensing Live events About Us The Guardian app Video Podcasts Pictures Newsletters Today's paper Inside the Guardian Guardian Weekly Crosswords Wordiply Corrections Tips Search input google-search Search Search jobs Holidays Digital Archive Guardian Licensing Live events About Us World Europe US news Americas Asia Australia Middle East Africa Inequality Global development Azerbaijan’s president, Ilham Aliyev, at a volleyball match in Baku in September 2017. His record on human rights has often been criticised since he took power in 2003. Photograph: Sergei Ilnitsky/EPA View image in fullscreen Azerbaijan’s president, Ilham Aliyev, at a volleyball match in Baku in September 2017. His record on human rights has often been criticised since he took power in 2003. Photograph: Sergei Ilnitsky/EPA Azerbaijan This article is more than 9 years old Outcry as Azerbaijan police launch crackdown on LGBT community This article is more than 9 years old At least 60 people have been imprisoned or fined after a spate of raids in the capital, Baku Shaun Walker in Moscow Thu 28 Sep 2017 10.00 CEST Last modified on Mon 27 Nov 2017 17.17 CET Share Prefer the Guardian on Google Authorities in Azerbaijan’s capital, Baku, have begun a vicious crackdown on the city’s LGBT community, according to activists in the country. Reports suggest that over the past 10 days dozens of gay and trans people have been arrested. One person the Guardian contacted said he had been beaten in police custody. Homosexuality is legal in the oil-rich, post-Soviet country, but a survey released last year by a rights organisation ranked Azerbaijan as the worst of 49 European countries in which to be gay. “There have been previous crackdowns on LGBT people, but this one is much bigger, with systematic and widespread raids,” said Samed Rahimli, a Baku-based lawyer who is helping coordinate legal defences for those who have been detained. Rahimli said he was aware of 60 cases of LGBT people who had been either sentenced to 20 days’ imprisonment or fined as part of the recent crackdown. Those currently in jail were charged with resisting police orders. “This is a common charge used in Azerbaijan for arbitrary arrests.” He said many more people could have been caught up in the sweep but not formally charged. Azerbaijani authorities denied that the roundup targeted all LGBT people. Eskhan Zakhidov, a spokesman for the country’s interior ministry, told the local APA news agency: “These raids are not against all sexual minorities. The arrested are people who demonstratively show a lack of respect for those around them, annoy citizens with their behaviour, and also those whom police or health authorities believe to be carriers of infectious diseases.” Zakhidov did not clarify what might count as annoying behaviour or a lack of respect. Other officials have said the raids did not target LGBT people specifically but were instead aimed at people engaged in prostitution, and were launched after complaints from local residents. The Guardian exchanged written messages with three gay men who said they had been caught up in the wave of arrests. None of them wanted their names disclosed and all said they were currently in hiding in Azerbaijan. One of the men said he had been beaten in a police station and released after being made to pay a 150 manat (£65) fine. “The police told me they would arrest me if they see me in the street again. Now I am afraid to leave my house,” he said. Another said he was approached in a Baku nightclub by police who said they were conducting a search for LGBT people. All three said they had friends currently in detention, and reported police carrying out sweeps of the city searching for people who “look gay”. Their stories could not be independently verified but chime with the testimony of local lawyers and rights activists. Samad Ismayilov, an Azerbaijani LGBT activist who left the country in 2014 citing safety fears and who now lives in the US, said he first began receiving information about the roundups on 16 September. “So far I know of 33 people involved, but this is only those who have gone to lawyers. I think there many more people who just want to keep quiet and hide,” he said. “There are no gay clubs in Azerbaijan, but there are some nightclubs that are considered gay-friendly, and friends have told me that for the first time there are police outside the clubs looking for gay people to detain.” Boris Dittrich, of the LGBT rights programme at Human Rights Watch, said the organisation was aware of reports about the events in Baku and was still trying to confirm them. He called for a “thorough and independent investigation” into the reports. The crackdown has echoes of a roundup of gay men in the southern Russian region of Chechnya this year, many of whom were detained and tortured. It was not immediately clear what prompted the Baku raids, or what the authorities’ end goal might be. The topic of homosexuality is taboo in conservative Azerbaijani society, and last year’s ILGA-Europe Rainbow Index ranked it the worst place in Europe to be gay, based on the number of violent homophobic attacks and discriminatory remarks by public figures. In 2014 a 20-year-old Azerbaijani gay rights activist, Isa Shakhmarli, hanged himself with a rainbow flag. “This world is not able to hold my colours,” he wrote in a suicide note. Rights groups have long criticised Azerbaijan’s rights record under President Ilham Aliyev, who took over from his father as the country’s ruler in 2003. However, the country’s oil wealth and lobbying efforts have meant international criticism has often been muted. Orkhan Mammad contributed to this report. Explore more on these topics Azerbaijan LGBTQ+ rights news Share Reuse this content Most viewed Most viewed World Europe US news Americas Asia Australia Middle East Africa Inequality Global development News Opinion Sport Culture Lifestyle Original reporting and incisive analysis, direct from the Guardian every morning Sign up for our email About us Help Complaints & corrections Contact us Tip us off SecureDrop Privacy policy Cookie policy Tax strategy Terms & conditions All topics All writers Newsletters Digital newspaper archive Bluesky Facebook Instagram LinkedIn Threads TikTok YouTube Advertise with us Search UK jobs Tips Accessibility settings Work with us Back to top © 2026 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. (dcr)