Skip to content Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Site search Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters Nesbitt defends extra money for gender identity services 5 August 2025 Share Save Add as preferred on Google Jayne McCormack & Abigail Taylor BBC News NI PA Media Health Minister Mike Nesbitt said the clinic would put a "huge emphasis of psychological and psychiatric help" Health Minister Mike Nesbitt has defended his decision to allocate more than £800,000 to gender identity services in Northern Ireland. His department announced the move last month, but it has faced criticism from the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) and Traditional Unionist Voice (TUV) as well as some Ulster Unionist assembly members. The Belfast Health Trust runs the Brackenburn Clinic, based in south Belfast, which has a service for adults experiencing gender dysphoria. There is also a separate service for young people. The minister said the decision to put extra funding into the services came because he wanted Northern Ireland to be part of the UK-wide ban on puberty blockers. Puberty blockers ban The trust said there were currently 1,163 adults on the waiting list, as well as 45 children and young people on a separate waiting list. Nesbitt said the adult and youth services were being amalgamated to ensure those seeking help did not find themselves on a "waiting list cliff edge" when they turn 18. Puberty blockers work by suppressing the release of hormones and have been prescribed to children questioning their gender. Last year, the government tightened the rules on the drugs, with the Stormont Executive supporting an indefinite ban in December. "It was made clear to me this would not happen unless we put some money to revive the gender identity clinic, which was basically lying dormant through a lack of funding," added the minister. He cited concerns over people accessing the drugs through "international providers" that the Department of Health had "no control" over, as the gender identity service was not up and running. "There is an example of a doctor who is Spanish working out of Romania, prescribing through Singapore - we have no control over the safety of that operation so that's why we decided to put some money into the gender identity service," he said. The minister said gender identity services had started in Northern Ireland in 2014, and that the clinic would put a "huge emphasis on psychological and psychiatric help". Alexa Moore from the Rainbow Project welcomed the funding and said there has been a "crisis" in gender identity services in NI for eight years What has been the reaction? The Rainbow Project said it "cautiously welcomed" the investment into the clinic, but that the department needed to ensure a high quality of care for those accessing services. Speaking on Good Morning Ulster , Alexa Moore, from the Rainbow Project, said there has been a "crisis" in gender identity services in Northern Ireland for eight years. "These services collapsed and we've been waiting since then to get a barebones services up and running. "Access to transition related healthcare is not a bad thing for many people and it can be lifesaving care for some people," she said. She said it is important for trans people to be a part of the conversation going forward. DUP assembly member, Jonathan Buckley said the policy represents misplaced priorities and "a track in the wrong direction" from the minister. "I felt the minister should have brought it to his executive colleagues to have a robust public discussion and debate about what is in the best interest of our young people and wider society," he added. He said he had concerns about "gender ideology" at clinics. The TUV assembly member Timothy Gaston called for the extra funding to be withdrawn and is to submit a public petition on the issue to the assembly next month. PA Media Jonathan Buckley said he had concerns about "gender ideology" at clinics Confirming a report in the News Letter that several years ago a five-year-old child had been accepted as a patient to the service , Nesbitt said he was still "asking questions about what had happened there". "I'm also still asking questions about who knew what in terms of ministers over the years, it is really important we are clear about what this service does and does not do," he added. Currently, the longest wait for an adult to be seen at the clinic is more than seven years. The trust said it wanted to sincerely apologise to those affected by delays, which it put down to an "insufficient workforce due to the absence of a commissioned service and workforce recruitment challenges". "Demand for the service has also increased significantly over recent years. We fully accept that the waiting time for gender services is unacceptable and not in keeping with the waiting time directive," a statement added. People in Northern Ireland can change their legal gender under the Gender Recognition Act (GRA) 2005. However, they need to be at least 18 years old and provide two medical reports, one from a specialist detailing their diagnosis of gender dysphoria and another listing any treatment or surgery they may have had to change their sexual characteristics. They also must prove they have lived full-time in their acquired gender for at least two years and have to apply to a UK gender recognition panel. Last month, the Equality Commission said it would seek a declaration from the High Court to address "uncertainties" over how to apply the UK Supreme Court ruling on the legal definition of a woman in Northern Ireland. Puberty blocker ban extended to Northern Ireland Supreme Court backs 'biological' definition of woman Belfast NI Health Northern Ireland Related Man in court charged with murder over north Belfast shooting Man charged with murder over north Belfast shooting Plans to light up Belfast City Hall for Safe Abortion Day to not go ahead, BBC understands More from the BBC 2 hrs ago Contentious Orange Order parade can go ahead, commission says The Parades Commission says the Drumcree parade should start earlier than the Orange Order wanted and with fewer people, but a residents group is challenging the decision. 2 hrs ago 3 hrs ago What is the Garvaghy Road dispute all about? Why is Drumcree making the headlines again nearly three decades on from the start of the dispute? 3 hrs ago 4 hrs ago Sarah Montgomery's murder was a 'coldblooded and sustained' attack Sarah Montgomery was pregnant with her third child when she was attacked in her home in 2025. 4 hrs ago 4 hrs ago PM tells Stormont parties to be 'realistic' in budget negotiations The prime minister Andy Burnham said that he did not have “unlimited funds”.
4 hrs ago 5 hrs ago Jeffrey Donaldson victim describes 'profound impact' of child sex abuse The former DUP leader was found guilty of 18 counts of child sex abuse, including one of rape, in June. 5 hrs ago Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages The BBC is in multiple languages Read the BBC In your own language BBC News Brasil BBC News Mundo (Spanish) BBC News မြန်မာ (Burmese) BBC News 中文 (Chinese) BBC News Indonesia BBC News 코리아 (Korean) BBC News ไทย (Thai) BBC News Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese) BBC News Azərbaycanca (Azeri) BBC News Magyarul (Hungarian) BBC News Кыргыз Кызматы (Kyrgyz) BBC News Polska (Polish) BBC News România (Romanian) BBC News Русская служба (Russian) BBC News na srpskom (Serbian) BBC News Україна (Ukrainian) BBC News O'zbek (Uzbek) BBC News عربي (Arabic) BBC News فارسی (Persian) BBC News Türkçe (Turkish) BBC News বাংলা (Bengali) BBC News دری (Dari) BBC News ગુજરાતી (Gujarati) BBC News हिन्दी (Hindi) BBC News मराठी (Marathi) BBC News नेपाली (Nepali) BBC News සිංහල (Sinhala) BBC News ਪੰਜਾਬੀ (Punjabi) BBC News Afaan Oromoo BBC News አማርኛ (Amharic) BBC News Afrique (French) BBC News Hausa BBC News Gaelic NAIDHEACHDAN BBC News Ìgbò BBC News Japanese 日本語 BBC News Gahuza BBC News Pidgin BBC News Somali BBC News Swahili BBC News தமிழ் (Tamil) BBC News తెలుగు (Telugu) BBC News ትግርኛ (Tigrinya) BBC News اردو (Urdu) BBC News Yorùbá BBC News World Service Follow BBC on: Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Do not share or sell my info Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us BBC.com Help & FAQs Content Index Set Preferred Source Copyright 2026 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites.  Read about our approach to external linking.