What Austria's far-right election win could mean for LGBTQ+ rights About Us Advertise Work with us Login Register Latest News View all UK US World Health Politics Sport Business Culture View all TV Film Celebrity Drag Theatre Music Gaming Lifestyle View all Beauty Careers Fashion Relationships Travel Shopping View all Deals Recommended Fashion & Beauty Tickets Video View all News & Politics Entertainment Lifestyle Discover Trans Awareness Week Drag Race Explainers The Queer Agenda Toggle menu Account Register Login Europe Austria’s far-right Freedom Party wins election – here’s what it could mean for LGBTQ+ people Sep 30 2024 Written by Amelia Hansford Share Save for later Comment Herbert Kickl, leader of the Austria Freedom Party. (Getty) A far-right party has won the most votes in an election in Austria for the first time since World War II. Queer News. Straight Up. The LGBTQ+ stories you don’t want to miss, delivered to your inbox daily. Email address required Must be valid email Register By registering you agree to our Privacy Policy Thanks for registering! You can update your email subscriptions at any time in the My profile section of your account. The pro-Kremlin, anti-Islamic, alt-right Austrian Freedom Party (FPÖ) won 29.2 per cent of the vote, beating the ruling Austrian People’s Party (ÖVP), which gained 26.5 per cent. The FPÖ’s leader, Herbert Kickl, who calls himself the “people’s chancellor”, said he was ready govern with “each and everyone one” of the country’s other parties. “We don’t need to change our position because we have always said that we’re ready to lead a government,” he told supporters in the capital, Vienna. “We’re ready to push forward this change in Austria side by side with the people. “The other parties should ask themselves where they stand on democracy.” Herbert Kickl’s far-right party won the most votes but not enough to secure a majority. (Getty) Kickl capitalised on a rising far-right presence in Europe, established by Hungarian prime minister Viktor Orbán, as well as growing fears over inflation, migration and crime. However, the FPÖ still failed to gain a majority and would have to rely on a coalition with another party if it is to govern. The Social Democratic Party of Austria (SPO), which won 21.1 per cent of the vote, has refused to even talk about a coalition with the FPÖ, but the ÖVP has not yet ruled out the possibility of sharing power. Dec 05 2022 26 LGBTQ+ couples we were rooting for but whose break-ups really, really hurt Where does Austria’s far-right Freedom Party stand on LGBTQ+ rights? The FPÖ win is likely to be detrimental to Austrian LGBTQ+ rights given the party’s historic rhetoric. Several of its past leaders, as well as Kickl, have targeted trans people particularly. As part of its manifesto, which contained several anti-migration and anti-Islamic policies, the FPÖ vowed to pass a constitutional determination which decrees that there are only two sexes. This would repeal several protections for transgender – and particularly non-binary – people that have been won over the past few years. Currently, Austria’s approach to queer rights has been commendable. The community-based equality index page Equaldex lists it in the top 20 of countries for LGBTQ+ equality. A Civil Status Law, passed in 2013, allowed trans citizens to legally change gender, albeit with a medical diagnosis, while same-sex marriage has been legal since 2019. The FPÖ’s plan to reverse protections for transgender citizens could lead to further protections being eroded farther down the line. Last year, Austria set aside millions of euros to compensate thousands of gay people who had been persecuted for decades prior to 2000. Share your thoughts! Let us know in the comments below, and remember to keep the conversation respectful. More: Austria Please login or register to comment on this story. Related articles Europe Sep 08 Who is lesbian far-right AfD leader Alice Weidel as German party wins in eastern state? Crime Jul 08 Far-right party leader faces criminal charges for defacing LGBTQ+ rainbow crossing Politics Feb 27 What has Green MP-elect Hannah Spencer said on LGBTQ+ rights? Politics Sep 19 2025 Where do the Your Party leaders stand on LGBTQ+ rights amid growing rift? UK Sep 02 2025 Where does gay Green Party leader Zack Polanski stand on trans rights? Latest News Previous Next Celebrity Sep 25 Trans influencer calls out Nikki Glaser for stand-up joke about what’s ‘in her pants’ Culture Sep 25 Trans pro wrestling trailblazer Gisele Shaw signs exclusive NWA contract Bisexual Sep 25 The Traitors star Freddie Fraser’s mum’s emotional response to his coming out Celebrity Sep 25 Lili Reinhart says Hollywood ‘too afraid’ to greenlight lesbian vampire project Celebrity Sep 25 Carly Rae Jepsen describes moment Heated Rivalry inspired her son’s name Celebrity Sep 25 John Green ‘heartbroken’ for trans Harry Potter fans as he talks JK Rowling Current Affairs Sep 25 JD Vance claims James Talarico has a “weird obsession with children in drag” News Sep 25 Susan Sarandon, Hannah Einbinder and Caleb Hearon detained outside UN after protesting Netanyahu What to buy now Previous Next Fashion Mar 27 Connor Ives and MAC team up to re-release the iconic ‘Protect The Dolls’ t-shirt Music Mar 12 The Pussycat Dolls confirm reunion with new single and tour – how to get tickets Music Jan 23 A full guide to the 2026 Harry Styles Together, Together tour including dates and presale info Shopping Nov 24 2025 Ten truly awesome Christmas gifts you can buy to support queer-owned businesses Trans Sep 09 2025 Lush creates ‘luxurious’ trans flag bath bomb to support trans charities Tickets Jun 25 2025 Dolly Parton announces mini Las Vegas residency after wrapping her last tour almost a decade ago Shopping May 15 2025 LEGO celebrates late gay icon Keith Haring with new art set: ‘Want this so bad’ Music Apr 18 2025 Primavera Sound’s most iconic queer performances, from Troye Sivan to Ethel Cain Exclusive Previous Next Exclusive Sep 11 Ania Magliano talks SNL UK season two and anti-LGBTQ voices in comedy: ‘We do edgy in the right way’ Exclusive Sep 11 Elliot Tuttle on Blue Film’s personal inspiration, rejection and taboo: ‘It’s about loneliness’ Exclusive Sep 09 OF star Andy Lee on love for gay fans, ‘poisonous’ creators and ‘harmful’ stunts: ‘Gay men lift me up every day’ Exclusive Sep 07 Real Housewives of London spill the tea: ‘She’d go to the opening of a packet of crisps’ Opinion Sep 04 Katseye in London: A showcase of real talent deserving of the deafening screams Exclusive Sep 02 Adrian Chiarella and Joe Bird on tackling conversion therapy in gay horror Leviticus Exclusive Aug 21 Sziget Festival drag and circus troupe want audiences to feel like family Exclusive Aug 20 Gay wrestler Anthony Bowens says Heated Rivalry shows authentic life of closeted athletes Register to save articles and more. It'll only take a minute and it's free. JOIN US TODAY! Already have an account? Log in here "/> Download the PinkNews app Award winning LGBTQ+ journalism About us Editorial Policy Contact us Advertise Work for us Terms and conditions Privacy policy Privacy manager Privacy Manager