 Macau: legal recognition of gender identity requires “prudent study” Plataforma Channels Português English 繁體中文 Angola Brazil Cape Verde China Guinea-Bissau Macau Mozambique Portugal Sao Tome and Principe East Timor World Politics Economy Society Culture Opinion Sports Future Partners Lifestyle Plataforma Brands Search Plataforma Channels Português English 繁體中文 Angola Brazil Cape Verde China Guinea-Bissau Macau Mozambique Portugal Sao Tome and Principe East Timor World Politics Economy Society Culture Opinion Sports Future Partners Lifestyle Plataforma Brands Search Canais Plataforma: en Search Search Regions Angola Brazil Cape Verde China Guinea-Bissau Macau Mozambique Portugal Sao Tome and Principe East Timor World Politics Economy Society Culture Opinion Sports Future Partners Lifestyle Plataforma Brands Início » Macau: legal recognition of gender identity requires “prudent study” Highlights Macau Politics Society Macau: legal recognition of gender identity requires “prudent study” “The recognition of gender identity involves issues, including those related to the core values of Macao society, civil law provisions, and marital and family relations,” the DSAJ noted 2026-04-07 Platform Share Facebook Twitter Linkedin Tumblr Whatsapp Telegram LINE Email 480 Authorities in Macau have told Lusa that a “prudent study of the legal issues involved” is necessary regarding the recognition of gender identity, ruling out any legislative revision. “In a situation where there is no general societal consensus, the Government of the Macao SAR [Special Administrative Region] still needs to carry out a prudent study of the legal issues involved,” the Direction of the Services for Justice Affairs (DSAJ) responded by email. Lusa had asked whether the department planned to create legislation for recognizing gender identity in Macau, the only area in China without laws allowing residents to change the gender marker on identity documents or undergo sex reassignment surgery – both of which are possible in mainland China and Hong Kong. “The recognition of gender identity involves issues, including those related to the core values of Macao society, civil law provisions, and marital and family relations,” the DSAJ noted. Read more: Macau appoints new heads at the DSI to support administrative modernization The direction stated that “up to this moment, there are no plans to revise the respective legal framework.” On the occasion of International Transgender Visibility Day on March 31, four transgender people in Macau told Lusa about experiences of exclusion, including barriers to accessing healthcare, employment, and education. For three of them, Portuguese nationality is the only way to have gender identity legally reflected in an official document. “It means there is a place that accepts my situation and a document that certifies that I am a man,” said Bryson (a pseudonym), a 20-year-old trans man who can obtain a Portuguese passport through his family. Lusa asked the Portuguese Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MNE) how many Macau residents had changed their sex on the citizen card, but “the Portuguese consular network does not have disaggregated data on such requests.” The ministry added, “These cases are still very rare.” Read more: O Lam wants to promote the mobility of talent in the cultural sector between Macau and Hengqin The Direction of Identification Services (DSI) in Macau received eight written requests for changing the sex on identity documents between 2004, when the first records were made, and February 28 of this year, all of which were “rejected according to the law.” Additionally, a total of 25 consultations about altering the registered sex in the BIR were received. “The DSI will continue to process requests according to the law and established procedures,” the authority concluded. You Might Be Interested In “Precision” in supporting Macau’s elderly “Talent” is key to the Greater Bay Area economy Macau Parliament rejects &#8220;unfounded comments&#8221; by EU Tags: Macau Politics Macau Society Share Facebook Twitter Linkedin Tumblr Whatsapp Telegram LINE Email Previous Post Champions League: Rui Borges aims to make history against Arsenal (with video) Next Post Angola: Pope Leo XIV to find &#8220;resilient, hopeful families&#8221; (with video) Related Articles Legal observers say a second trial&#8217;s... The holdout juror in the Lindsay... Lindsay Clancy&#8217;s lawyer asked a judge... Cindy Crawford and Rande Gerber plan... Spain: Government approves extraordinary housing measure... Rehab living industry faces scrutiny following... NATO assures Moscow&#8217;s hybrid attacks will... Spain: Madrid government gives Sánchez executive... Trump expresses surprise after UK grants... Latest Legal observers say a second trial&#8217;s cost and complexity could push toward Lindsay Clancy staying in a state mental health facility instead 2026-09-29 The holdout juror in the Lindsay Clancy case spoke publicly for the first time. He says the focus should be on the children, not him (with video) 2026-09-29 Lindsay Clancy&#8217;s lawyer asked a judge to dismiss all charges Tuesday. A ruling is expected in the coming weeks (with video) 2026-09-29 Cindy Crawford and Rande Gerber plan private memorial following son Presley&#8217;s cremation 2026-09-29 Spain: Government approves extraordinary housing measure package 2026-09-29 Trending The holdout juror in the Lindsay Clancy case spoke publicly for the first time. He says the focus should be on the children, not him (with video) 2026-09-29 Cindy Crawford and Rande Gerber plan private memorial following son Presley&#8217;s cremation 2026-09-29 Rehab living industry faces scrutiny following death of Presley Gerber (with video) 2026-09-29 Rod Stewart finally end touring with 2027 farewell dates 2026-09-29 Plataforma Studio Macao International Fireworks Display Contest returns with new features Macao’s Century-old Industrial Memory Flourishes Anew Macau hosts around 40 UNESCO Creative Cities of Gastronomy International Cities of Gastronomy Fest returns with expanded programme (with video) Macau celebrates the Year of the Horse with a packed programme through March Contact Us Generalist media, focusing on the relationship between Portuguese-speaking countries and China. Avenida da Praia Grande N° 715, Edifício Veng Lei, 3º andar P, Macau Tel: (853) 2882 2020 Fax: (853) 2882 2028 Email: info@plataformamedia.com Sales: sales@plataformamedia.com Plataforma Studio Macao International Fireworks Display Contest returns with new features Macao’s Century-old Industrial Memory Flourishes Anew Macau hosts around 40 UNESCO Creative Cities of Gastronomy International Cities of Gastronomy Fest returns with expanded programme (with video) Macau celebrates the Year of the Horse with a packed programme through March About Us Objectives and Achievements Contacts Newsletter Subscribe Plataforma Newsletter to keep up with everything! Subscribe Newsletters: 電子報—澳門（葡文）| Newsletter Macau (in Portuguese) 電子報—澳門 （中文）| Newsletter Macau (in Chinese) 電子報—葡語國家（葡文）| Newsletter Lusofonia (in Portuguese) Leave this field empty if you&#039;re human: &copy; 2025 &#8211; Copyright Plataforma Media . Homepage Datasheet Contacts Objectives and Achievements Facebook Twitter Instagram Angola Brazil Cape Verde China Guinea-Bissau Macau Mozambique Portugal Sao Tome and Principe East Timor World x Legal observers say a second trial&#8217;s... The holdout juror in the Lindsay... Lindsay Clancy&#8217;s lawyer asked a judge... Uh-oh! It looks like you're using an ad blocker. Our website relies on ads to provide free content and sustain our operations. By turning off your ad blocker, you help support us and ensure we can continue offering valuable content without any cost to you. We truly appreciate your understanding and support. Thank you for considering disabling your ad blocker for this website 