Gay man with HIV charged under Myanmar sodomy law Politics Local National World Arts & Entertainment Financial Photos Opinions Life Style Noticias en Español Classifieds About Archives Print Edition Find a Copy Subscribe Contact Us Los Angeles Blade Advertise with Us Become A Blade Member Connect with us Washington Blade: LGBTQ News, Politics, LGBTQ Rights, Gay News Gay man with HIV charged under Myanmar sodomy law FUND LGBTQ JOURNALISM Donate Politics Trump-appointed judge restores White House TV pool access White House press pool pushes back after Trump bars three outlets Jeremy Moss looks to bring LGBTQ advocacy from Lansing to Capitol Hill LGBTQ issues, attacks on Democrats dominate unusual RNC midterm convention Ind. prosecutor declines to press charges over false Buttigieg child welfare complaint Local Comings & Goings Former Capital Pride board member reiterates sexual harassment allegation Center for Black Equity’s annual gala to take place Oct. 3 Charles Bowers, former owner of Baltimore gay bar the Hippo, dies Being a female firefighter comes with unique risks, and rewards D.C. Maryland Virginia Delaware Best of Gay DC Photos National Grace Meng sharply criticizes DOJ over hospital settlements Philadelphia event to launch 2026 LGBT History Month Dutch prime minister visits Stonewall Inn For lesbian victims of domestic violence, competent care is scare Long-time DignityUSA executive director announces retirement World Colombia withdraws from Equal Rights Coalition Caso Karlina: Una sentencia histórica contra las terapias de «conversión» Dutch prime minister visits Stonewall Inn Spike in HIV cases prompts Fiji to declare national emergency UN human rights chief sounds alarm over ‘comprehensive onslaught’ against LGBTQ rights Noticias en Español Caso Karlina: Una sentencia histórica contra las terapias de «conversión» Mujer trans salvadoreña es encontrada sin vida Realidad LGBTQ en Honduras: fuga o muerte Un terremoto también se vive desde el exilio Centenares de personas participan en la Marcha del Orgullo en la capital salvadoreña Opinions Washington Blade responds to concerns over White House pool duties Young people should know history of the fight for human rights How emerging drone tech can support LGBTQ workplace inclusion What LGBTQ veterans are building after ‘Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell’ Gun reform is an LGBTQ rights issue Peter Rosenstein Kate Clinton Rick Rosendall Kathi Wolfe Brock Thompson Mark Lee A&E PHOTOS: HRC National Dinner What’s frightening is also funny in ‘Venus’ ‘Lizzie Borden’ might be the best ‘Monster’ yet Tyler Clementi Foundation to host fundraiser in Rehoboth Calendar: September 25-October 1 Television All the queer things to watch this fall ‘Vampire Lestat’ heats up Pride month with queer action Repression, toxic masculinity fuel intense queer drama ‘Half Man’ Spring’s best in queer TV and film Netflix’s ‘The Boyfriend’ is more than a dating show Dining Union Market’s Last Call Bar a welcoming oasis for all RAMMYs honors restaurant industry professionals Behind the bar with Moon Rabbit’s Thi Nguyen My Rehoboth Beach culinary tour New D.C. restaurants opening just in time for spring Theater What’s frightening is also funny in ‘Venus’ D.C.’s fall theater season is already well underway Actress takes on bisexual ‘Ma’ Rainey in new Round House production Immersive ‘Nation-State’ imagines a society free of authoritarianism New GALA show about WWII spy full of conflict, intrigue Film ‘Thelma and Louise’ remains landmark of unspoken queer rebellion ‘Here the Whole Time’ delivers queer coming-of-age comedy ‘Teenage Sex and Death’ has never been more entertaining Queer team brings girl power to fully baked ‘The Wrong Girls’ ‘Maddie’s Secret’ defies campy expectations Music Queer mega stars coming to D.C. this fall DJ Chanel Santini is bringing the heat and some gender-fluid diversity to XBIZ Miami Gaga, Cardi B, and more to grace D.C. stages this spring Washington chorale kicks off Christmas with vibrant program Queer mega stars (and allies) ready to take D.C. stages this fall Books Curl up with a good book this fall Dolly Parton biography puts her hardships into context Historiography with heart New book examines fashionista Audrey Smaltz’s fabulous life New book examines Trump cuts to LGBTQ healthcare Photos PHOTOS: HRC National Dinner PHOTOS: Shenandoah Valley Pride PHOTOS: Walk and 5K to End HIV PHOTOS: Wanda Alston Foundation Fall Reception PHOTOS: SMYAL Fall Brunch Best of Gay DC Contests Financial Factors to consider when hiring an interior designer The LGBTQ real estate map is being redrawn Moving presents a chance to ‘clean house’ With gas prices soaring again, a staycation is a good plan When buying a home, it’s decisions, decisions, decisions Health United States Conference on HIV/AIDS grapples with federal budget cuts AIDS Healthcare Foundation announces 3 million people globally in its care LGBTQ people, weed, and mental health: what you need to know UPDATED: Trans-led HIV clinic in Portsmouth struggles amid funding cuts Housewives head to Capitol Hill to promote PrEP coverage News United States Conference on HIV/AIDS grapples with federal budget cuts AIDS Healthcare Foundation announces 3 million people globally in its care LGBTQ people, weed, and mental health: what you need to know UPDATED: Trans-led HIV clinic in Portsmouth struggles amid funding cuts Housewives head to Capitol Hill to promote PrEP coverage Cannabis Culture LGBTQ people, weed, and mental health: what you need to know New Mexico guv signs marijuana legalization Delaware cannabis activists take on corporate marijuana Virginia marijuana legalization takes effect July 1 Highstream 420 Festival Livestream Fitness NEW YEAR NEW YOU 2020: Local VIDA master trainer on trends, tips and technology at the gym Why a personalized diet can help you achieve better results Al Roker blasts Jillian Michaels for criticizing Keto diet Make 2019 your year for fitness Raising healthy adults starts now Classifieds About Newsletter Sign-Up Print Edition Archives Advertise Los Angeles Blade BECOME A MEMBER homepage news Gay man with HIV charged under Myanmar sodomy law Addy Chen’s supporters critical of media coverage of case Published 8 years ago on November 2, 2018 By Victor Maung Share Tweet Addy Chen , left, has been charged under Myanmar’s sodomy law. (Photo courtesy of Myo Min Latt) YANGON, Myanmar — The LGBTI community in Myanmar has demand fair media coverage of a gay man with HIV who is charged under the controversial Penal Code 377 for allegedly committing sexual abuse against one of his employees. The accused, Aung Myo Htut, aka Addy Chen, is an outspoken LGBTI rights advocates and commonly known to be HIV-positive. Chen, who also owns a restaurant in Yangon, allegedly asked one of his waiters to give him a massage and sexually assaulted him in March. Chen was arrested on the same day the man who accused him of sexual assault filed a case against him at a local police station. Chen was charged under Section 377 of the national penal code, which makes same-sex sexual acts illegal, regardless if they were consensual or not. Chen faces of a sentence of between 10 years to life in prison if convicted. The media’s portrayal of LGBTI people in Myanmar is unfavorable, adding to deeply rooted social stigma and stereotypes against sexual minorities and people living with HIV/AIDS. LGBTI rights advocates in the country say the portrayal of Chen’s case in the mainstream media is biased against the accused and is very damaging to the LGBTI population as a whole. “We do not see any media ethics here,” says Yaya Aye Myat, a well-known transgender activist. “Many media reports Addy Chen’s case as if he was already convicted. That makes the public outrageous. In fact, a person is not guilty until proven by the court of law and until then, the person is entitled to the benefits of doubt.” The Irrawaddy, an influential newspaper in Myanmar, first published a sensational video of Chen’s accuser’s testimony and it went viral among the country’s netizens. The video shows a one-sided story in which Chen’s accuser claims Chen coerced him into performing oral sex on him and later engaging in unprotected receptive anal sex. Chen’s accuser emotionally said he is just a poor rural boy trying to earn a living in the city to support his siblings. He added Chen ruined his life because he may have been infected with HIV after having unprotected sex. The restaurant manager, who helped Chen’s accuser to file the case against Chen and is also one of the key witnesses against him, also appeared in the video that has had 1.9 million views and 24,000 shares on the Irrawaddy’s Facebook page. Other Burmese language media outlets followed up in Chen’s case after the video went viral. Many people find the allegations against Chen outrageous and are demanding harsh punishment for him, even though a court has not found him guilty. Chen’s accuser in the video showed HIV-preventative drugs he has been taking as suggested by a doctor, but tabloid media has mistakenly described them as antiretroviral drugs, assuming he is already HIV-positive. Chen’s family deactivated his Facebook page within a week of his arrest because of an overwhelming number of hate messages, derogatory comments and even death threats that he received. Nay Oo Lwin, a gay rights advocate in Myanmar, says the LGBTI community is against sexual assault, regardless of whether the perpetrator is gay or straight. Lwin added he wants to see a fair trial in Chen’s case. “We respect the rule of law but we don’t want to be repressed by the laws,” he said. “I feel that the media reports on Addy Chen’s case and discussions on social media are attacking the gay community and intensifying the stereotypes.” Although the mainstream media reports unanimously describe Chen as guilty, the recent court testimony suggests the opposite. During a hearing that took place on Oct. 4, the court physician said he didn’t find semen or any tears and lacerations on the anuses of both Chen and his accuser, in contrast to his earlier testimony in which he said Chen had penetrative anal sex with him for 20 minutes. There were also inconsistencies in testimonies by the plaintiff and witnesses. Media reports also did not report the fact the restaurant manager and witnesses who testified owed a significant amount of money to Chen. They are now postponing payment of these debts due to the trial. “Addy trusted the manager girl and loaned her lots of money,” said Chen’s relative, Myo Min Latt. “All six witnesses summoned by the plaintiff are debtors to Addy Chen. We have documents that Addy loaned them money. They also admitted to owing money to Addy during the court hearing.” The defendant’s attorney says she believes her client never abused any of his staff except for asking his accuser to give him a massage. She said the alleged victim has exploited the fact that Chen is a gay man living with HIV to frame him as an abuser. Despite this evidence, the trials continue. Chen’s request for bail was denied for the third time on Oct. 30. Chen’s family says his health is now deteriorating in prison. They say he only has limited access to medicine and medical facilities that people with HIV need. “He has been detained in prison for eight months so far,” says Latt. “He is already very depressed by the media portrayal of him as gay rapist. He is now getting frequently ill. The trials are going on although the court physician had testified of not finding any signs of abuses on the victim. In the last hearing, the plaintiff attorney requested to add an additional witness to extend the trial. I think they are deliberately delaying the final verdict.” Myat says the court’s decision to deny Chen’s request for bail will impact the entire LGBTI community. “There are cases, charged under Section 375 of Penal Code for accused of minor rape and the alleged perpetrators were released on bail, given their age or health condition,” she said. “But not for this particular case. So, who will hold accountable, if the accused in this case does not survive all the trials and found to be not guilty in the end?” Related Topics: Addy Chen HIV LGBT Myanmar Myo Min Latt Nay Oo Lwin Yaya Aye Myat Up Next Comings & Goings Don't Miss 98 House Dems urge Trump administration to drop anti-trans plan Advertisement FUND LGBTQ JOURNALISM SIGN UP FOR E-BLAST Featured Local Savings You may like PHOTOS: Walk and 5K to End HIV New book examines Trump cuts to LGBTQ healthcare NYC lawmakers seek to repeal bathhouse ban homepage news Honoring the legacy of New Orleans’ 1973 UpStairs Lounge fire Why the arson attack that killed 32 gay men still resonates 50 years later Published 3 years ago on June 22, 2023 By Robert Fieseler Fifty years ago this week, 32 gay men were killed in an arson attack on the UpStairs Lounge in New Orleans. (Photo by G.E. Arnold/Times-Picayune; reprinted with permission) On June 23 of last year, I held the microphone as a gay man in the New Orleans City Council Chamber and related a lost piece of queer history to the seven council members. I told this story to disabuse all New Orleanians of the notion that silence and accommodation, in the face of institutional and official failures, are a path to healing. The story I related to them began on a typical Sunday night at a second-story bar on the fringe of New Orleans’ French Quarter in 1973, where working-class men would gather around a white baby grand piano and belt out the lyrics to a song that was the anthem of their hidden community, “United We Stand” by the Brotherhood of Man. “United we stand,” the men would sing together, “divided we fall” — the words epitomizing the ethos of their beloved UpStairs Lounge bar, an egalitarian free space that served as a forerunner to today’s queer safe havens. Around that piano in the 1970s Deep South, gays and lesbians, white and Black queens, Christians and non-Christians, and even early gender minorities could cast aside the racism, sexism, and homophobia of the times to find acceptance and companionship for a moment. For regulars, the UpStairs Lounge was a miracle, a small pocket of acceptance in a broader world where their very identities were illegal. On the Sunday night of June 24, 1973, their voices were silenced in a murderous act of arson that claimed 32 lives and still stands as the deadliest fire in New Orleans history — and the worst mass killing of gays in 20th century America. As 13 fire companies struggled to douse the inferno, police refused to question the chief suspect, even though gay witnesses identified and brought the soot-covered man to officers idly standing by. This suspect, an internally conflicted gay-for-pay sex worker named Rodger Dale Nunez, had been ejected from the UpStairs Lounge screaming the word “burn” minutes before, but New Orleans police rebuffed the testimony of fire survivors on the street and allowed Nunez to disappear. As the fire raged, police denigrated the deceased to reporters on the street: “Some thieves hung out there, and you know this was a queer bar.” For days afterward, the carnage met with official silence. With no local gay political leaders willing to step forward, national Gay Liberation-era figures like Rev. Troy Perry of the Metropolitan Community Church flew in to “help our bereaved brothers and sisters” — and shatter officialdom’s code of silence. Perry broke local taboos by holding a press conference as an openly gay man. “It’s high time that you people, in New Orleans, Louisiana, got the message and joined the rest of the Union,” Perry said. Two days later, on June 26, 1973, as families hesitated to step forward to identify their kin in the morgue, UpStairs Lounge owner Phil Esteve stood in his badly charred bar, the air still foul with death. He rebuffed attempts by Perry to turn the fire into a call for visibility and progress for homosexuals. “This fire had very little to do with the gay movement or with anything gay,” Esteve told a reporter from The Philadelphia Inquirer. “I do not want my bar or this tragedy to be used to further any of their causes.” Conspicuously, no photos of Esteve appeared in coverage of the UpStairs Lounge fire or its aftermath — and the bar owner also remained silent as he witnessed police looting the ashes of his business. “Phil said the cash register, juke box, cigarette machine and some wallets had money removed,” recounted Esteve’s friend Bob McAnear, a former U.S. Customs officer. “Phil wouldn’t report it because, if he did, police would never allow him to operate a bar in New Orleans again.” The next day, gay bar owners, incensed at declining gay bar traffic amid an atmosphere of anxiety, confronted Perry at a clandestine meeting. “How dare you hold your damn news conferences!” one business owner shouted. Ignoring calls for gay self-censorship, Perry held a 250-person memorial for the fire victims the following Sunday, July 1, culminating in mourners defiantly marching out the front door of a French Quarter church into waiting news cameras. “Reverend Troy Perry awoke several sleeping giants, me being one of them,” recalled Charlene Schneider, a lesbian activist who walked out of that front door with Perry. (Photo by G.E. Arnold/Times-Picayune; reprinted with permission) Esteve doubted the UpStairs Lounge story’s capacity to rouse gay political fervor. As the coroner buried four of his former patrons anonymously on the edge of town, Esteve quietly collected at least $25,000 in fire insurance proceeds. Less than a year later, he used the money to open another gay bar called the Post Office, where patrons of the UpStairs Lounge — some with visible burn scars — gathered but were discouraged from singing “United We Stand.” New Orleans cops neglected to question the chief arson suspect and closed the investigation without answers in late August 1973. Gay elites in the city’s power structure began gaslighting the mourners who marched with Perry into the news cameras, casting suspicion on their memories and re-characterizing their moment of liberation as a stunt. When a local gay journalist asked in April 1977, “Where are the gay activists in New Orleans?,” Esteve responded that there were none, because none were needed. “We don’t feel we’re discriminated against,” Esteve said. “New Orleans gays are different from gays anywhere else… Perhaps there is some correlation between the amount of gay activism in other cities and the degree of police harassment.” (Photo by H.J. Patterson/Times-Picayune; reprinted with permission) An attitude of nihilism and disavowal descended upon the memory of the UpStairs Lounge victims, goaded by Esteve and fellow gay entrepreneurs who earned their keep via gay patrons drowning their sorrows each night instead of protesting the injustices that kept them drinking. Into the 1980s, the story of the UpStairs Lounge all but vanished from conversation — with the exception of a few sanctuaries for gay political debate such as the local lesbian bar Charlene’s, run by the activist Charlene Schneider. By 1988, the 15th anniversary of the fire, the UpStairs Lounge narrative comprised little more than a call for better fire codes and indoor sprinklers. UpStairs Lounge survivor Stewart Butler summed it up: “A tragedy that, as far as I know, no good came of.” Finally, in 1991, at Stewart Butler and Charlene Schneider’s nudging, the UpStairs Lounge story became aligned with the crusade of liberated gays and lesbians seeking equal rights in Louisiana. The halls of power responded with intermittent progress. The New Orleans City Council, horrified by the story but not yet ready to take its look in the mirror, enacted an anti-discrimination ordinance protecting gays and lesbians in housing, employment, and public accommodations that Dec. 12 — more than 18 years after the fire. “I believe the fire was the catalyst for the anger to bring us all to the table,” Schneider told The Times-Picayune, a tacit rebuke to Esteve’s strategy of silent accommodation. Even Esteve seemed to change his stance with time, granting a full interview with the first UpStairs Lounge scholar Johnny Townsend sometime around 1989. Most of the figures in this historic tale are now deceased. What’s left is an enduring story that refused to go gently. The story now echoes around the world — a musical about the UpStairs Lounge fire recently played in Tokyo, translating the gay underworld of the 1973 French Quarter for Japanese audiences. When I finished my presentation to the City Council last June, I looked up to see the seven council members in tears. Unanimously, they approved a resolution acknowledging the historic failures of city leaders in the wake of the UpStairs Lounge fire. Council members personally apologized to UpStairs Lounge families and survivors seated in the chamber in a symbolic act that, though it could not bring back those who died, still mattered greatly to those whose pain had been denied, leaving them to grieve alone. At long last, official silence and indifference gave way to heartfelt words of healing. The way Americans remember the past is an active, ongoing process. Our collective memory is malleable, but it matters because it speaks volumes about our maturity as a people, how we acknowledge the past’s influence in our lives, and how it shapes the examples we set for our youth. Do we grapple with difficult truths, or do we duck accountability by defaulting to nostalgia and bluster? Or worse, do we simply ignore the past until it fades into a black hole of ignorance and indifference? I believe that a factual retelling of the UpStairs Lounge tragedy — and how, 50 years onward, it became known internationally — resonates beyond our current divides. It reminds queer and non-queer Americans that ignoring the past holds back the present, and that silence is no cure for what ails a participatory nation. Silence isolates. Silence gaslights and shrouds. It preserves the power structures that scapegoat the disempowered. Solidarity, on the other hand, unites. Solidarity illuminates a path forward together. Above all, solidarity transforms the downtrodden into a resounding chorus of citizens — in the spirit of voices who once gathered ‘round a white baby grand piano and sang, joyfully and loudly, “United We Stand.” (Photo by Philip Ames/Times-Picayune; reprinted with permission) Robert W. Fieseler is a New Orleans-based journalist and the author of “Tinderbox: the Untold Story of the Up Stairs Lounge Fire and the Rise of Gay Liberation.” Continue Reading homepage news New Supreme Court term includes critical LGBTQ case with ‘terrifying’ consequences Business owner seeks to decline services for same-sex weddings Published 4 years ago on October 5, 2022 By Chris Johnson The U.S. Supreme Court is to set consider the case of 303 Creative, which seeks to refuse design services for same-sex weddings. (Blade file photo by Michael Key) The U.S. Supreme Court, after a decision overturning Roe v. Wade that still leaves many reeling, is starting a new term with justices slated to revisit the issue of LGBTQ rights. In 303 Creative v. Elenis, the court will return to the issue of whether or not providers of custom-made goods can refuse service to LGBTQ customers on First Amendment grounds. In this case, the business owner is Lorie Smith, a website designer in Colorado who wants to opt out of providing her graphic design services for same-sex weddings despite the civil rights law in her state. Jennifer Pizer, acting chief legal officer of Lambda Legal, said in an interview with the Blade, “it’s not too much to say an immeasurably huge amount is at stake” for LGBTQ people depending on the outcome of the case. “This contrived idea that making custom goods, or offering a custom service, somehow tacitly conveys an endorsement of the person — if that were to be accepted, that would be a profound change in the law,” Pizer said. “And the stakes are very high because there are no practical, obvious, principled ways to limit that kind of an exception, and if the law isn’t clear in this regard, then the people who are at risk of experiencing discrimination have no security, no effective protection by having a non-discrimination laws, because at any moment, as one makes their way through the commercial marketplace, you don’t know whether a particular business person is going to refuse to serve you.” The upcoming arguments and decision in the 303 Creative case mark a return to LGBTQ rights for the Supreme Court, which had no lawsuit to directly address the issue in its previous term, although many argued the Dobbs decision put LGBTQ rights in peril and threatened access to abortion for LGBTQ people. And yet, the 303 Creative case is similar to other cases the Supreme Court has previously heard on the providers of services seeking the right to deny services based on First Amendment grounds, such as Masterpiece Cakeshop and Fulton v. City of Philadelphia. In both of those cases, however, the court issued narrow rulings on the facts of litigation, declining to issue sweeping rulings either upholding non-discrimination principles or First Amendment exemptions. Pizer, who signed one of the friend-of-the-court briefs in opposition to 303 Creative, said the case is “similar in the goals” of the Masterpiece Cakeshop litigation on the basis they both seek exemptions to the same non-discrimination law that governs their business, the Colorado Anti-Discrimination Act, or CADA, and seek “to further the social and political argument that they should be free to refuse same-sex couples or LGBTQ people in particular.” “So there’s the legal goal, and it connects to the social and political goals and in that sense, it’s the same as Masterpiece,” Pizer said. “And so there are multiple problems with it again, as a legal matter, but also as a social matter, because as with the religion argument, it flows from the idea that having something to do with us is endorsing us.” One difference: the Masterpiece Cakeshop litigation stemmed from an act of refusal of service after owner, Jack Phillips, declined to make a custom-made wedding cake for a same-sex couple for their upcoming wedding. No act of discrimination in the past, however, is present in the 303 Creative case. The owner seeks to put on her website a disclaimer she won’t provide services for same-sex weddings, signaling an intent to discriminate against same-sex couples rather than having done so. As such, expect issues of standing — whether or not either party is personally aggrieved and able bring to a lawsuit — to be hashed out in arguments as well as whether the litigation is ripe for review as justices consider the case. It’s not hard to see U.S. Chief Justice John Roberts, who has sought to lead the court to reach less sweeping decisions (sometimes successfully, and sometimes in the Dobbs case not successfully) to push for a decision along these lines. Another key difference: The 303 Creative case hinges on the argument of freedom of speech as opposed to the two-fold argument of freedom of speech and freedom of religious exercise in the Masterpiece Cakeshop litigation. Although 303 Creative requested in its petition to the Supreme Court review of both issues of speech and religion, justices elected only to take up the issue of free speech in granting a writ of certiorari (or agreement to take up a case). Justices also declined to accept another question in the petition request of review of the 1990 precedent in Smith v. Employment Division, which concluded states can enforce neutral generally applicable laws on citizens with religious objections without violating the First Amendment. Representing 303 Creative in the lawsuit is Alliance Defending Freedom, a law firm that has sought to undermine civil rights laws for LGBTQ people with litigation seeking exemptions based on the First Amendment, such as the Masterpiece Cakeshop case. Kristen Waggoner, president of Alliance Defending Freedom, wrote in a Sept. 12 legal brief signed by her and other attorneys that a decision in favor of 303 Creative boils down to a clear-cut violation of the First Amendment. “Colorado and the United States still contend that CADA only regulates sales transactions,” the brief says. “But their cases do not apply because they involve non-expressive activities: selling BBQ, firing employees, restricting school attendance, limiting club memberships, and providing room access. Colorado’s own cases agree that the government may not use public-accommodation laws to affect a commercial actor’s speech.” Pizer, however, pushed back strongly on the idea a decision in favor of 303 Creative would be as focused as Alliance Defending Freedom purports it would be, arguing it could open the door to widespread discrimination against LGBTQ people. “One way to put it is art tends to be in the eye of the beholder,” Pizer said. “Is something of a craft, or is it art? I feel like I’m channeling Lily Tomlin. Remember ‘soup and art’? We have had an understanding that whether something is beautiful or not is not the determining factor about whether something is protected as artistic expression. There’s a legal test that recognizes if this is speech, whose speech is it, whose message is it? Would anyone who was hearing the speech or seeing the message understand it to be the message of the customer or of the merchants or craftsmen or business person?” Despite the implications in the case for LGBTQ rights, 303 Creative may have supporters among LGBTQ people who consider themselves proponents of free speech. One joint friend-of-the-court brief before the Supreme Court, written by Dale Carpenter, a law professor at Southern Methodist University who’s written in favor of LGBTQ rights, and Eugene Volokh, a First Amendment legal scholar at the University of California, Los Angeles, argues the case is an opportunity to affirm the First Amendment applies to goods and services that are uniquely expressive. “Distinguishing expressive from non-expressive products in some contexts might be hard, but the Tenth Circuit agreed that Smith’s product does not present a hard case,” the brief says. “Yet that court (and Colorado) declined to recognize any exemption for products constituting speech. The Tenth Circuit has effectively recognized a state interest in subjecting the creation of speech itself to antidiscrimination laws.” Oral arguments in the case aren’t yet set, but may be announced soon. Set to defend the state of Colorado and enforcement of its non-discrimination law in the case is Colorado Solicitor General Eric Reuel Olson. Just this week, the U.S. Supreme Court announced it would grant the request to the U.S. solicitor general to present arguments before the justices on behalf of the Biden administration. With a 6-3 conservative majority on the court that has recently scrapped the super-precedent guaranteeing the right to abortion, supporters of LGBTQ rights may think the outcome of the case is all but lost, especially amid widespread fears same-sex marriage would be next on the chopping block. After the U.S. Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals ruled against 303 Creative in the lawsuit, the simple action by the Supreme Court to grant review in the lawsuit suggests they are primed to issue a reversal and rule in favor of the company. Pizer, acknowledging the call to action issued by LGBTQ groups in the aftermath of the Dobbs decision, conceded the current Supreme Court issuing the ruling in this case is “a terrifying prospect,” but cautioned the issue isn’t so much the makeup of the court but whether or not justices will continue down the path of abolishing case law. “I think the question that we’re facing with respect to all of the cases or at least many of the cases that are in front of the court right now, is whether this court is going to continue on this radical sort of wrecking ball to the edifice of settled law and seemingly a goal of setting up whole new structures of what our basic legal principles are going to be. Are we going to have another term of that?” Pizer said. “And if so, that’s terrifying.” Continue Reading homepage news Kelley Robinson, a Black, queer woman, named president of Human Rights Campaign Progressive activist a veteran of Planned Parenthood Action Fund Published 4 years ago on September 20, 2022 By Chris Johnson Kelley Robinson (Screen capture via HRC YouTube) Kelley Robinson, a Black, queer woman and veteran of Planned Parenthood Action Fund, is to become the next president of the Human Rights Campaign, the nation’s leading LGBTQ group announced on Tuesday. Robinson is set to become the ninth president of the Human Rights Campaign after having served as executive director of Planned Parenthood Action Fund and more than 12 years of experience as a leader in the progressive movement. She’ll be the first Black, queer woman to serve in that role. “I’m honored and ready to lead HRC — and our more than three million member-advocates — as we continue working to achieve equality and liberation for all Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, and Queer people,” Robinson said. “This is a pivotal moment in our movement for equality for LGBTQ+ people. We, particularly our trans and BIPOC communities, are quite literally in the fight for our lives and facing unprecedented threats that seek to destroy us.” Kelley Robinson IS NAMED as The next human rights Campaign president The next Human Rights Campaign president is named as Democrats are performing well in polls in the mid-term elections after the U.S. Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade, leaving an opening for the LGBTQ group to play a key role amid fears LGBTQ rights are next on the chopping block. “The overturning of Roe v. Wade reminds us we are just one Supreme Court decision away from losing fundamental freedoms including the freedom to marry, voting rights, and privacy,” Robinson said. “We are facing a generational opportunity to rise to these challenges and create real, sustainable change. I believe that working together this change is possible right now. This next chapter of the Human Rights Campaign is about getting to freedom and liberation without any exceptions — and today I am making a promise and commitment to carry this work forward.” The Human Rights Campaign announces its next president after a nearly year-long search process after the board of directors terminated its former president Alphonso David when he was ensnared in the sexual misconduct scandal that led former New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo to resign. David has denied wrongdoing and filed a lawsuit against the LGBTQ group alleging racial discrimination. Kelley Robinson , seen here with Cathy Chu of SMYAL and Amy Nelson of Whitman-Walker Health, is the next Human Rights Campaign president. (Washington Blade photo by Michael Key) Continue Reading Advertisement Latest Popular Real Estate 15 minutes ago Factors to consider when hiring an interior designer Photos 3 hours ago PHOTOS: HRC National Dinner Real Estate 6 hours ago The LGBTQ real estate map is being redrawn Advice 7 hours ago I’m 66, he’s 27. Is it love or am I being played? Theater 7 hours ago What’s frightening is also funny in ‘Venus’ Commentary 4 days ago Washington Blade responds to concerns over White House pool duties LGBTQ Non-Profit Organizations 4 days ago Gov. Whitmer to serve as keynote speaker for Saturday’s HRC National Dinner Fiji 4 days ago Spike in HIV cases prompts Fiji to declare national emergency District of Columbia 4 days ago Capital Pride chair resigns from board after just 10 months Online Culture 4 days ago Clavicular charged in alleged rape of teenage influencer Advertisement Sign Up for Weekly E-Blast Advertisement Popular Commentary 4 days ago Washington Blade responds to concerns over White House pool duties LGBTQ Non-Profit Organizations 4 days ago Gov. Whitmer to serve as keynote speaker for Saturday’s HRC National Dinner Fiji 4 days ago Spike in HIV cases prompts Fiji to declare national emergency Online Culture 4 days ago Clavicular charged in alleged rape of teenage influencer About Advertise Contact Us Find A Copy Classifieds Privacy Policy Terms of Service RSS Syndication © Copyright Brown, Naff, Pitts Omnimedia, Inc. 2021. All rights reserved | Powered by Keynetik .