Travel advice and advisories for Brazil --> Skip to main content Skip to "About this site" × Close: Top bar (escape key) Information for Canadians on global security and travel related to the conflict in the Middle East Language selection Français Government of Canada / Gouvernement du Canada Search Travel.gc.ca Search website Search website --> Search website --> Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Travel Destinations Help us to improve our website. Take our survey ! --> --> Brazil travel advice Exercise a high degree of caution (with regional advisories) Latest updates: Safety and security section – added information on general elections Last updated: September 29, 2026 11:25 ET On this page Risk level Safety and security Entry and exit requirements Health Laws and culture Natural disasters and climate Need help? Risk level Disclaimer The features in this map do not constitute an authoritative source of geographical information. This map is solely intended to assist Canadians by illustrating the risk levels contained in the Travel Advice and Advisories for this destination. The features in this map do not necessarily represent the views of the Canadian government on international boundaries, nomenclature or political status. The text under the Risk levels section takes precedence over this map. Enlarge map&nbsp;&nbsp; Brazil travel advice Disclaimer The features in this map do not constitute an authoritative source of geographical information. This map is solely intended to assist Canadians by illustrating the risk levels contained in the Travel Advice and Advisories for this destination. The features in this map do not necessarily represent the views of the Canadian government on international boundaries, nomenclature or political status. The text under the Risk levels section takes precedence over this map. Brazil - Exercise a high degree of caution Exercise a high degree of caution in Brazil due to high crime rates and regular incidents of gang-related and other violence in urban areas. Border areas - Avoid non-essential travel Avoid non-essential travel to the following border areas due to criminal activity related to drugs and arms smuggling by illegal armed groups and other criminal organizations: within 20 km of the border with Bolivia, excluding Pantanal National Park within 20 km of the border with Colombia within 20 km of the border with French Guiana within 20 km of the border with Guyana within 20 km of the border with Paraguay within 20 km of the border with Peru within 20 km of the border with Suriname within 50 km of the border with Venezuela &nbsp; Certain neighbourhoods in Rio de Janeiro - Avoid all travel Avoid all travel to the following vulnerable neighbourhoods (favela complexes) in Rio de Janeiro due to very high rates of violent crime, frequent large-scale police operations and difficulty in obtaining emergency assistance: Complexo da Mar&eacute; Complexo da Penha &nbsp; Back to top Safety and security General elections Brazil will hold general elections on October 4, 2026, with a second round on October 25, 2026, if required. There may be political gatherings, demonstrations and increased security measures before, during and after the elections. Avoid areas where demonstrations and large gatherings are taking place Follow the instructions of local authorities Monitor local media for the latest information Border areas Criminal activity related to drug trafficking and arms smuggling poses a threat to your personal security. If you choose to travel near border areas exercise caution at all times monitor local media for the latest information follow the instructions of local authorities and security forces Major urban centres Vulnerable neighbourhoods Vulnerable neighbourhoods, commonly referred to as &ldquo;favelas&rdquo; or &ldquo;comunidades,&rdquo; are characterized by informal housing developments, crowded quarters, poorer conditions and/or irregular construction. They are located throughout major cities. Gang-related violence and organized crime is prevalent in these neighbourhoods. Armed clashes and shootouts between security forces and alleged criminals occur regularly. There is a risk of violence spilling over to neighbouring areas, including affluent neighbourhoods and tourist destinations. Gangs strictly control access to these neighbourhoods. Tourists have been killed after accidentally entering on foot or when following GPS directions while driving. These neighbourhoods are not safe for outsiders, even if they are accompanied by a local guide. Access and assistance from emergency service providers is very limited. In Rio de Janeiro, Complexo da Mar&eacute; and Complexo da Penha are especially dangerous. Ask your hotel, travel agency, or trusted locals for assistance in identifying the favelas in the area where you are travelling Ensure your GPS or navigation application does not direct you through a favela Other high-crime areas Crime rates are high throughout the country, particularly in: Bel&eacute;m Fortaleza Manaus Recife Rio de Janeiro Salvador S&atilde;o Paulo Tourists are mostly affected by theft, but could also become victims of violent crime, which often occurs in the following areas: S&atilde;o Paulo: around S&atilde;o Paulo Cathedral Avenida Paulista historical downtown area Municipal Market Pinacoteca (Pina)&nbsp;do Estado de S&atilde;o Paulo Princess Isabel Square Luz station Satellite cities of Bras&iacute;lia: Ceil&acirc;ndia Estrutural Parano&aacute; Santa Maria S&atilde;o Sebasti&atilde;o Rio de Janeiro: Cidade de Deus to Gard&ecirc;nia Azul and surrounding area Complexo do Alem&atilde;o Complexo do Turano Jacarezinho Morro do Borel to Morro do Andara&iacute; and surrounding area Morro do Juramento and surrounding area Morro do Urubu and surrounding area Vila Kennedy to Vila Alian&ccedil;a and surrounding area Armed criminal groups operate in multiple parts of Rio de Janeiro, and armed confrontations with security forces occur regularly. Security conditions can deteriorate rapidly and without warning, particularly during police or military operations. If you decide to travel to these areas: always be aware of your surroundings avoid going out after dark travel in groups avoid isolated areas do not resist an attack Crime Violent crime Violent crime occurs, including: armed robberies carjackings burglaries sexual assaults Violent crime, often involving weapons, is common. Mass shootings occur, often resulting in casualties. Although tourists are rarely involved, you could be in the wrong place at the wrong time. Theft Robberies occur regularly and often involve weapons such as guns and knives. Thieves generally target people who appear wealthy, such as those using cell phones and laptops. Robberies can occur anywhere, including in all touristic areas in Rio de Janiero (such as Lapa, Santa Teresa and Copacabana beach). Exercise caution in crowded areas. Drive-by snatching by armed thieves on motorcycles occurs regularly, particularly in S&atilde;o Paulo and Porto Alegre. Always keep car doors and windows closed and locked If you feel threatened while driving, do not stop Mass robberies &ldquo;arrast&otilde;es&rdquo;&nbsp;involve a group of criminals that swarm public places and snatch valuable items such as cash, jewellery and cell phones. This type of crime can occur day and night at: beaches traffic jams shopping centres restaurants Criminals sometimes attempt to rob you by pretending to sell you something or by offering to help if you appear lost. If you&rsquo;re lost, go into a nearby business or hotel to ask for directions. Victims have been seriously injured or killed when resisting perpetrators, who were armed or under the influence of drugs. Petty crime Petty crime, such as pickpocketing, purse and cell phone snatching, and car theft, is common in Brazil&rsquo;s large cities. This includes all touristic areas of Rio de Janiero&nbsp;and S&atilde;o Paulo. Exercise caution in crowded areas. Theft commonly occurs at or near: beaches outdoor markets hotels bars and nightclubs airports and bus stations parking lots Petty crime increases around big events and festivities, such as: parades and street festivals large-scale sporting events international conferences Carnival Christmas During your trip: keep your personal belongings, including your passport and other travel documents, in a secure place be aware of your surroundings, especially in busy tourist areas do not carry large sums of cash or valuables unnecessarily do not show signs of affluence or wear expensive jewellery avoid using your cell phone in public do not resist an attack Spiked food and drinks Spiked food and drink incidents are increasing in Brazil, particularly in Rio&nbsp;de Janeiro. Incidents of spiked food and drinks to force victims to use their debit or credit card to withdraw money from ATMs have been reported, including on beaches in Rio de Janeiro and in crowded restaurants and bars in S&atilde;o Paulo. Be cautious when meeting new acquaintances, such as people met on dating websites or who approach you in a nightlife setting. The use of drugs to facilitate sexual assault and robbery against foreigners has also been reported. Assaults frequently occur in unofficial taxis. Incidents are most likely to occur: in bars and restaurants in hotels in nightclubs at public beaches While you&rsquo;re in Brazil: be wary of accepting items from new acquaintances never leave food or drinks unattended or in the care of strangers order drinks in sealed bottles or cans instead of in plastic cups Adulterated alcohol People have died in Brazil after drinking methanol-adulterated alcohol. Poisoning incidents have been reported in various locations across the states of S&atilde;o Paulo and Pernambuco, and in Bras&iacute;lia. Adulterated drinks include gin, whiskey and vodka sold in bars and liquor stores. Brazil&rsquo;s Ministry of Health advises not to consume these beverages until further notice and to seek medical assistance immediately if you begin to feel sick within 12 to 24 hours after consuming an alcoholic beverage. Be cautious if you choose to drink alcohol. Drugs, alcohol and travel Express kidnappings Express kidnappings occur in the Rio de Janeiro Metropolitan Region. Criminals may kidnap a victim for a few hours and force them to withdraw funds from an ATM or make bank transfers using their mobile applications in exchange for their release. Thieves may put drugs into food and drinks, temporarily incapacitating victims, who become quickly disoriented and are vulnerable to kidnapping. Always exercise caution Only use reputable taxi companies or ride-sharing applications Do not accept rides from new acquaintances or strangers Avoid showing signs of affluence, such as using a cell phone, headphones or wearing jewelry Never leave food or drinks unattended Avoid isolates areas, especially alone or at night Carjackings Carjackings are common in cities, especially at night in remote areas. They often occur at intersections and in tunnels. Perpetrators usually carry weapons. Keep doors and windows closed and locked at all times Pay attention to your surroundings while waiting at traffic lights Avoid poorly lit areas Avoid stopping on the side of roads Be wary of strangers offering to help you Women&rsquo;s safety Sexual assault has been committed, including against foreign women. Women travelling alone may be subject to some forms of harassment or verbal abuse. Avoid walking alone at night, including on public beaches Keep your hotel doors and windows closed and locked Do not accept offers of transportation from strangers If you&rsquo;re the victim of a sexual assault or other crime, you should report it immediately to the police and the nearest Government of Canada office. Advice for women travellers Home invasions Home invasions by armed gangs occur, especially in December and January, when many people leave for summer or Christmas holidays.&nbsp;Affluent neighbourhoods and foreigners&rsquo; homes have been targeted by criminals due to perceived wealth. Be aware that police response often takes time. Organized crime Organized crime associated with international drug trafficking occurs in Brazil, as it is situated along transit routes. This is most common in the north and northeastern regions. Scams Common tourist scams include: carrying unsuspected drug packages online romance scams Brazil is a drug trafficking hub. An increasing number of travellers have fallen victim to scams in which illegal drugs are hidden inside luggage that an acquaintance asked them to take with them when departing Brazil. Websites targeting senior citizens are reportedly a source of such scams. Romance scams on dating sites or through social media have occurred. Victims of these scams have been: tricked into carrying unsuspected drug packages kidnapped forced to transfer and withdraw money Before travelling to Brazil to visit someone you met online: be wary of individuals who ask you to carry a package from Brazil on their behalf beware of people who show a keen interest in you online Warning to Canadian seniors targeted by international drug smuggling scams Fraud Credit card, debit card and ATM fraud Credit and debit card as well as ATM fraud occurs frequently. Criminals have used proximity card readers to charge the cards of unsuspecting persons.&nbsp;Vendors have also pretended card readers weren&rsquo;t working or didn&rsquo;t have signal to charge the client multiple times. When using your debit or credit card: cover the keypad with one hand when entering your PIN pay careful attention when others are handling your cards avoid using card readers with an irregular or unusual feature use ATMs located in public areas or inside a bank or business check for any unauthorized transactions on your account statements consider disabling the tap function of your card carefully check the amount being charged on the card reader&rsquo;s screen Cybercrime Cybercrime, malware attacks and online extortion occur in Brazil. Criminals can compromise public Wi-Fi networks to steal personal data or credit information. Be cautious when posting information or photos on social media Use your own USB adaptor or carry an extra battery pack Use secure public Wi-Fi networks Beware of people who show a keen interest in you online Useful links Overseas fraud Cyber security while travelling Demonstrations Demonstrations occur frequently.&nbsp;Even peaceful demonstrations can turn violent at any time. They can also lead to disruptions to traffic and public transportation. Avoid areas where demonstrations and large gatherings are taking place Follow the instructions of local authorities Monitor local media for information on ongoing demonstrations Mass gatherings (large-scale events) 2SLGBTQI+ persons Brazilian law doesn't criminalize sexual acts or relationships between persons of the same sex. However, 2SLGBTQI+ persons in Brazil have been victims of violence based on their sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, or sex characteristics. Violent incidents include physical assault resulting in severe injury. Public displays of affection are more socially acceptable in larger cities, but they are not generally acceptable in most of the country. Travel and your sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression and sex characteristics Soccer matches and sports events Sports events sometimes lead to rowdy behaviour and violent incidents. Avoid wearing team colours during soccer game days Be vigilant if you attend soccer matches and sports rallies Leave as soon as possible if violence breaks out Swimming Some beaches are unsupervised. Coastal waters can be dangerous as riptides are common. Public beaches in major cities are often polluted and unfit for swimming. Respect the areas reserved for swimming Always respect warning flags advising of dangerous conditions Be wary of sharks, especially in Brazil&rsquo;s northeast near Recife Follow the instructions of local authorities Adventure travel Outdoor activities, such as hiking, can be dangerous in remote areas as trails may become impassable due to flash floods. Mobile phone coverage may be limited in remote areas. Extreme sports, such as skydiving and bungee jumping, are dangerous and tour operators may not meet Canadian safety standards. Certain adventure activities, such as hot air ballooning, are both dangerous and illegal. If you intend to participate in adventure travel activities: share your itinerary with a friend or family member if hiking alone stay on marked trails and consider hiring an experienced guide from a reputable company obtain detailed information on your activity and the environment in which you will be setting out refrain from using equipment if you are unsure of its condition or safety Useful links Adventure travel health and safety Visit Brazil &nbsp;&ndash; Tourism Committee of Brazil Power outages Power outages occur regularly in major cities. Transport and business services can be disrupted.&nbsp;Most large hotels are equipped with a generator. Roads Road safety Fatal accidents are frequent. Roadside assistance is not widely available. If you need it, call your vehicle insurance provider, or choose a commercial service available in your area. Road conditions Road conditions are generally good in large cities and on federal highways, especially those linking large cities. Regional highways are generally adequate but state and municipal roads in rural areas are often poorly maintained. Driving can also be dangerous due to: lack of traffic signs potholes unpaved roads insufficient lighting &nbsp;landslides Driving habits Drivers often disregard traffic laws, and Brazilian police do not strictly enforce them. Drivers often speed and they can be aggressive and reckless. Motorcyclists often ride between lanes. Be careful when crossing the street, as drivers do not always give pedestrians the right of way. Drinking and driving is common. At night and in large cities, drivers commonly treat red lights as stop signs to protect against hold-ups at intersections. If you choose to drive in Brazil: always keep doors and windows closed and locked be careful with motorcycles when changing lanes if you feel threatened, do not stop if you are in a traffic accident, call the police immediately never confront the driver of another vehicle Transportation Public transportation can be very crowded at peak transit times, and pickpocketing is common at bus and subway stations. Be extremely cautious when using public transportation at night. When travelling to and from Rio de Janeiro&rsquo;s international airport: only use authorized taxis, reputable ride-sharing services or transfers arranged by hotels or trusted organizations do not make unnecessary stops en route avoid public transportation, particularly buses follow routes recommended by accommodation staff and remain alert throughout the journey Subway Petty theft is common in the subway system, especially when crowded. There are subway cars reserved for women and children in Rio de Janeiro and Bras&iacute;lia. Buses and coaches There have been reports of theft and violence on city buses in Rio de Janeiro and near vulnerable neighbourhoods across the country, especially during rush hour. Inter-city buses are generally reliable. Ensure that you use a reputable company before you book your travel. Bus accidents occur regularly. Major bus services charge fixed, pre-paid rates. Do not use public vans. Taxis Assaults, thefts, and scams often occur in unofficial taxis. Registered taxis are identifiable by their red licence plates and have a taxi meter to determine the legal fare. In Bras&iacute;lia, most registered taxis are white with a green sign on the doors. In Rio de Janeiro, most registered taxis are yellow with a blue stripe and have a company&rsquo;s name labelled near the blue stripe at the back. Malls and the airport often have their own registered taxis. Only use officially marked taxis Arrange your pickup with your hotel before arrival when travelling by air, or use authorized taxis at the airport Avoid paying with cards Ride-sharing applications Ride-sharing applications are available in Brazil. If you use one, confirm the driver&rsquo;s identity and the licence plate before getting in the car. Piracy Pirate attacks and armed robberies against ships occur in coastal waters in the north-east. Pirates have also attacked lodges along the Amazon River. Travellers should take appropriate precautions. Live piracy map &nbsp;&ndash; International Maritime Bureau Piracy Reporting Centre Air travel We don't make assessments on the compliance of foreign domestic airlines with international safety standards. Information about foreign domestic airlines Back to top Entry and exit requirements Some countries have imposed measures in response to the Ebola disease outbreak . These can include restrictions on entry and health screening measures for travellers having recently visited an affected country. If you are suspected of having symptoms, you may be subject to isolation, quarantine and/or travel restrictions. Contact the authorities of the country you are travelling to for more details. The authorities of a country or territory decide who can enter or exit through its borders. The Government of Canada cannot intervene on your behalf if you do not meet your destination&rsquo;s entry or exit requirements. We have obtained the information on this page from local authorities. It can, however, change at any time. Verify this information with the&nbsp; Foreign Representatives in Canada . Passport Entry requirements vary depending on the type of passport you're travelling with. Before you travel, check with your transportation company about passport requirements. Its rules on passport validity may be more stringent than the country's entry rules. Regular Canadian passport Your passport must be valid for the duration of your stay in Brazil. Passport for official travel Different entry rules may apply. Official travel Passport with &ldquo;X&rdquo; gender identifier While the Government of Canada issues passports with an &ldquo;X&rdquo; gender identifier, it cannot guarantee your entry or transit through other countries. You might face entry restrictions in countries that do not recognize the &ldquo;X&rdquo; gender identifier. Before you leave, verify this information with the closest foreign representative for your destination. You should also be aware that current systems used by some countries and travel companies may not recognize the &ldquo;X&rdquo; gender identifier. You may still be asked to provide your sex/gender information as either male or female when travelling. Other travel documents Different entry rules may apply when travelling with a temporary passport or an emergency travel document. Before you leave, verify this information with the closest foreign representative for your destination. Useful links Travel and your sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression and sex characteristics Foreign&nbsp;Representatives in Canada Canadian passports and other travel documents Visas Tourist visa: required Business visa: required Student visa: required If you are applying for a visa for a minor, contact the nearest Brazilian government office for guidance on how to submit this application. Length of stay If you intend to stay more than 90 days, you must obtain an extension from the Federal Police before your authorized stay expires. You may be required to authenticate your documents. Useful links Brazil eVisa &ndash; VFS Global Extended stay in Brazil &nbsp;&ndash; Government of Brazil (Portuguese only) Immigration public services &ndash; Government of Brazil Authentication of documents Other entry requirements Customs officials may ask you to show them: a return or onward ticket proof of sufficient funds to cover your stay Dual citizenship If you&rsquo;re both a Canadian and a Brazilian citizen, you must enter and exit Brazil using your Brazilian passport. Children and travel Brazil has strict requirements for the exit of its citizens under the age of 18, including those with dual citizenship. A travel authorization is mandatory for all Brazilian children leaving Brazil unaccompanied, with one parent, or with a third party. The parent or legal guardian authorizing the trip must present the following documents: an original identification document of the person authorizing the trip an original or photocopy of the minor&rsquo;s Brazilian or foreign passport, which will be used for the trip an original or certified photocopy of the minor&rsquo;s Brazilian birth certificate Useful links Travel authorization for Brazilian minors &nbsp;&ndash; Ministry of Foreign Affairs Children and travel Yellow fever Learn about potential entry requirements related to yellow fever (vaccines section). Back to top Health Relevant Travel Health Notices Measles: Advice for travellers This section has information and advice about health risks you might face when travelling. Following this advice can help reduce your risk of getting sick. Not all risks are listed here. It's best to talk to a healthcare provider or visit a travel health clinic preferably 6 weeks before your trip to get personalized health advice. Even if your travel date is coming up soon, it's still worthwhile to make an appointment. Outbreak Monitoring Chikungunya in Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil There is a large outbreak of chikungunya in the region of Mato Grosso do Sul in Brazil. Chikungunya is caused by a virus that&rsquo;s spread by infected mosquitoes, causing fever and joint pain. In some cases, the joint pain can last for months or even years. To protect yourself, prevent mosquito bites at all times, as the mosquitoes that spread chikungunya can bite both day and night. Insect bite and pest prevention If you experience symptoms of chikungunya such as rash, fatigue, nausea, vomiting, headache, or muscle pain while travelling or after returning home, seek medical attention and inform your health care provider where you have been. Learn more: Chikungunya Routine vaccines Make sure your routine vaccinations are up-to-date before you travel, no matter where you&rsquo;re going. These may include vaccines for measles, mumps, and rubella (MMR), diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis (whooping cough), polio, varicella (chickenpox), meningococcal disease, seasonal flu, and others. Provincial and Territorial Immunization Information Pre-travel vaccines and medications When travelling in this destination, you might be at risk for diseases that can be prevented with vaccines or medications. Talk to a travel health care provider about which ones are right for you based on your travel plans. The highlights below will also tell you if your destination may require that vaccine for entering or exiting. Yellow Fever - Country Entry Requirements Yellow fever &nbsp; is a disease caused by a flavivirus from the bite of an infected mosquito. Travellers get vaccinated either because it is required to enter a country or because it is recommended for their protection. Risk There is a risk of yellow fever in this country. Country Entry Requirement* Proof of vaccination is not required to enter this country. Recommendation Vaccination is recommended depending on your itinerary. Contact a designated Yellow Fever Vaccination Centre well in advance of your trip to arrange for vaccination. Discuss travel plans, activities, and destinations with a health care professional. Protect yourself from mosquito bites. About Yellow Fever Yellow Fever Vaccination Centres in Canada * It is important to note that &nbsp; country entry requirements &nbsp; may not reflect your risk of yellow fever at your destination. It is recommended that you contact the nearest &nbsp; diplomatic or consular office &nbsp; of the destination(s) you will be visiting to verify any additional entry requirements. Hepatitis A There is a risk of hepatitis A in this destination. It is a disease of the liver. People can get hepatitis A if they ingest contaminated food or water, eat foods prepared by an infectious person, or if they have close physical contact (such as oral-anal sex) with an infectious person, although casual contact among people does not spread the virus. &nbsp; Practise&nbsp; safe food and water precautions and wash your hands often. Vaccination is recommended for all travellers to areas where hepatitis A is present. Hepatitis B &nbsp; Hepatitis B is a risk in every destination. It is a viral liver disease that is easily transmitted from one person to another through exposure to blood and body fluids containing the hepatitis B virus.&nbsp; Travellers who may be exposed to blood or other bodily fluids (e.g., through sexual contact, medical treatment, sharing needles, tattooing, acupuncture or occupational exposure) are at higher risk of getting hepatitis B. Hepatitis B vaccination is recommended for all travellers. Prevent hepatitis B infection by practicing safe sex, only using new and sterile drug equipment, and only getting tattoos and piercings in settings that follow public health regulations and standards. Measles Measles is a serious viral infection that spreads easily. It spreads through the air, and can stay in the air for up to 2 hours. You can also get measles by direct contact with an infected person or by touching a surface with the virus on it and then touching your eyes, nose, or mouth before washing your hands. Getting vaccinated is the best way to protect yourself and others from measles. In Canada, the measles vaccine is part of the routine immunization schedule. If you&rsquo;re unsure whether you&rsquo;re protected, talk to a healthcare provider. Learn more: Measles COVID-19 COVID-19 is an infectious viral disease. Most of the time, it spreads when people are in close contact with others who are infected with the virus. It spreads through respiratory particles, or through an infected surface or object. Vaccination is one of the most important ways to protect yourself from developing serious complications from COVID-19. Talk to a healthcare provider about the COVID-19 vaccine before travelling. Evidence shows that the COVID-19 vaccines used in Canada are very effective at preventing severe illness, hospitalization and death from COVID-19. In addition to vaccination, use personal protective measures to help protect yourself and others. Learn more : Vaccine for COVID-19: How to get vaccinated COVID-19: Spread, prevention and risks Influenza &nbsp;The best way to protect yourself from seasonal influenza (flu) is to get vaccinated every year. Get the flu shot at least 2 weeks before travelling. &nbsp; &nbsp;The flu occurs worldwide.&nbsp; &nbsp;In the Northern Hemisphere, the flu season usually runs from November to&nbsp; &nbsp;April. &nbsp;In the Southern Hemisphere, the flu season usually runs between April and&nbsp; &nbsp;October. &nbsp;In the tropics, there is flu activity year round.&nbsp; The flu vaccine available in one hemisphere may only offer partial protection against the flu in the other hemisphere. The flu virus spreads from person to person when they cough or sneeze or by touching objects and surfaces that have been contaminated with the virus. Clean your hands often and wear a mask if you have a fever or respiratory symptoms. Malaria Malaria &nbsp;is a serious and sometimes fatal disease that is caused by parasites spread through the bites of mosquitoes. &nbsp; There is a risk of malaria in certain areas and/or during a certain time of year in this destination.&nbsp; Antimalarial medication may be recommended depending on your itinerary and the time of year you are travelling. Consult a health care professional or visit a travel health clinic before travelling to discuss your options. It is recommended to do this 6 weeks before travel, however, it is still a good idea any time before leaving.&nbsp; &nbsp; Protect yourself from mosquito bites at all times:&nbsp; &bull; Cover your skin and use an approved insect repellent on uncovered skin.&nbsp; &bull; Exclude mosquitoes from your living area with screening and/or closed, well-sealed doors and windows. &bull; Use insecticide-treated bed nets if mosquitoes cannot be excluded from your living area.&nbsp; &bull; Wear permethrin-treated clothing.&nbsp; &nbsp; If you develop symptoms similar to malaria when you are travelling or up to a year after you return home, see a health care professional immediately. Tell them where you have been travelling or living.&nbsp; Rabies Rabies is present in this destination and is carried by dogs and some wildlife, including bats. Rabies is a serious disease that&rsquo;s almost always fatal once symptoms appear. It's spread to humans through the saliva of infected animals, mainly through bites, but it can also be spread through scratches. Before you travel, talk to a health care professional about rabies vaccination. Vaccination may be recommended for people at higher risk of exposure, such as: veterinarians and wildlife workers children adventure travellers and cave explorers (spelunkers) people who will be in close contact with animals While travelling: avoid contact with animals, including free roaming dogs supervise children closely around animals If you&rsquo;re bitten or scratched by an animal: wash the wound right away with soap and clean water for about 15 minutes get medical care as soon as possible Treatment to prevent rabies is often available in this destination. If you get treatment to prevent rabies while outside Canada, ask for: written records of medications and vaccines administered, including when they were given, product names, and batch or lot numbers photos of the packaging and labels of any medications or vaccines given to you When you return to Canada, see a health care professional as soon as possible and bring your treatment records to your appointment. Learn more:&nbsp; Rabies: Symptoms and treatment Safe food and water precautions Eating or drinking unsafe food or water, or swimming in contaminated water can make you sick while travelling. Take precautions by following these tips: Boil it, cook it, peel it, or leave it (only eat food that is prepared safely) Avoid, if possible, getting water in your eyes, mouth, or nose when swimming in freshwater (like streams, lakes, or canals), especially after heavy rain or flooding - the water might look clean but can still be contaminated&nbsp; Don&rsquo;t swallow water when bathing, showering, swimming in pools, or using hot tubs&nbsp; Eat and drink safely outside Canada Travellers' diarrhea Travellers' diarrhea is the most common illness that affects travellers. Travellers are at higher risk when going to destinations with poor standards of hygiene and sanitation and/or eating at places with poor food handling practices. Young children, the elderly, and people with existing health problems are more at risk. Travellers&rsquo; diarrhea is caused by many different bacteria, viruses, and parasites. It&rsquo;s easily spread from person-to-person or by consuming contaminated food or water. Besides diarrhea, symptoms usually include fever, nausea, vomiting, and stomach pain. Frequent handwashing and making careful food and beverage choices can reduce your risk of developing travellers&rsquo; diarrhea. If you become sick, the most important thing to do is to maintain hydration by drinking lots of fluids. Learn more: Travellers&rsquo; diarrhea Eat and drink safely outside Canada Typhoid fever There is a risk of typhoid fever in this destination, but the risk is low for most travellers. Travellers are at higher risk in places with poor sanitation, limited access to clean water, or unsafe food preparation. Cleaning your hands often and making safe food and drink choices can help lower your risk. Typhoid fever is a disease caused by bacteria. It spreads through consuming contaminated food or drinking water, or through contact with the feces of an infected person.&nbsp; Symptoms may include fever, cough, diarrhea, tiredness, headache, and loss of appetite. Young children, older adults, people visiting friends or relatives, and people with weakened immune systems are more likely to become seriously ill.&nbsp; A vaccine is available and may be recommended for some travellers to this destination, depending on their risk. Talk to a health care provider before you travel to find out if this vaccine is recommended for you. Learn more: Typhoid fever Eating and drinking safely abroad Clean your hands to help reduce the spread of infectious diseases Schistosomiasis There is a risk of schistosomiasis in this destination. Schistosomiasis is a parasitic disease caused by tiny worms (blood flukes) which can be found in freshwater (lakes, rivers, ponds, and wetlands). The worms can break the skin, and their eggs can cause stomach pain, diarrhea, flu-like symptoms, or urinary problems. Schistosomiasis mostly affects underdeveloped and r ural communities, particularly agricultural and fishing communities. Most travellers are at low risk. Travellers should avoid contact with untreated freshwater such as lakes, rivers, and ponds (e.g., swimming, bathing, wading, ingesting). There is no vaccine or medication available to prevent infection. Tick and insect bite prevention Many diseases are spread by bites from infected ticks and insects like mosquitoes, fleas, or flies. Before you travel, find out what types of ticks or insects are in the area, when they&rsquo;re most active, and what diseases they can spread. To protect yourself from bites: use an approved bug spray (insect repellent) on exposed skin wear light-coloured, loose clothing made of tightly woven materials like nylon or polyester wear socks and closed-toe shoes sleep under mosquito netting if you&rsquo;re outdoors or staying in places that aren&rsquo;t fully enclosed do a full body tick check on yourself, your children, your gear, and any pets you&rsquo;re travelling with when you return from outdoor activities Insect bite and pest prevention Personal insect repellents Chikungunya There is a risk of chikungunya in this country. The level of risk may vary by: season year region elevation The virus that causes chikungunya is spread through the bite of an infected mosquito. It can cause fever and pain in the joints. In some cases, the joint pain can be severe and last for months or years. Protect yourself from mosquito bites at all times. Insect bite and pest prevention A vaccine for the prevention of chikungunya is approved in Canada. Talk to your healthcare provider about how best to prevent chikungunya, including the benefits and risks of vaccination based on factors such as your age, itinerary and personal preferences. &nbsp; Learn more: Chikungunya Leishmaniasis – Cutaneous and mucocutaneous Cutaneous and mucocutaneous leishmaniasis can occur in this destination, though the risk is low for most travellers. The infection spreads through the bite of an infected sandfly. Cutaneous symptoms usually appear weeks or months after infection, and may include swollen lymph nodes and persistent skin sores and ulcers. Mucocutaneous symptoms can develop at the same time, or years later, causing nasal congestion, frequent nose bleeds, and sores in the nose or mouth. To lower your risk, protect yourself from sandfly bites. Sandflies are most active between sunset and sunrise in rural, forested and some urban areas.&nbsp; There is no vaccine or medication to prevent infection with the parasite that causes leishmaniasis. Learn more: Leishmaniasis Leishmaniasis - Visceral Visceral leishmaniasis, also called kala azar, can occur in this destination, though the risk is low for most travellers. The infection spreads through the bite of an infected sandfly. Symptoms can appear weeks or months after infection and may include fever, weight loss, an enlarged liver or spleen, and anaemia. Without treatment, visceral leishmaniasis can be fatal. If you think you might have visceral leishmaniasis, it&rsquo;s important to speak to a health care provider as soon as possible. To lower your risk, protect yourself from sandfly bites. Sandflies are most active between sunset and sunrise in rural, forested and some urban areas. There is no vaccine or medication to prevent infection with the parasite that causes leishmaniasis. Learn more: Leishmaniasis Dengue In this country, &nbsp; dengue&nbsp;is a risk to travellers. It is a viral disease spread to humans by mosquito bites. Dengue can cause flu-like symptoms. In some cases, it can lead to severe dengue, which can be fatal. The level of risk of dengue changes seasonally, and varies from year to year. The level of risk also varies between regions in a country and can depend on the elevation in the region. Mosquitoes carrying dengue typically bite during the daytime, particularly around sunrise and sunset. Protect yourself from mosquito bites. There is no vaccine or medication available in Canada to prevent dengue.&nbsp; Learn more: Dengue Insect bite and pest prevention Zika virus Zika virus is a risk in this country.&nbsp; Zika virus is primarily spread through the bite of an infected mosquito. It can also be sexually transmitted. Zika virus can cause serious birth defects. During your trip: Prevent mosquito bites at all times. Use condoms correctly or avoid sexual contact, particularly if you are pregnant. If you are pregnant or planning a pregnancy, you should discuss the potential risks of travelling to this destination with your health care provider. You may choose to avoid or postpone travel.&nbsp; For more information, see Zika virus: Pregnant or planning a pregnancy. American trypanosomiasis American trypanosomiasis (Chagas disease) &nbsp; is a risk in this country. It is caused by a parasite spread by infected triatomine bugs. The infection can be inactive for decades, but humans can eventually develop complications causing disability and even death. Risk is generally low for most travellers. Protect yourself from triatomine bugs, which are active at night, by using mosquito nets if staying in poorly-constructed housing. There is no vaccine available for Chagas disease. Oropouche virus disease Oropouche virus disease (OVD) is a risk in this destination. It is a disease caused by the Oropouche virus, which is spread to humans through the bite of an infected small fly called a midge (also known as no-see-um) and possibly certain mosquitos. Symptoms usually include fever, headache, joint and muscle pain, chills, and sometimes nausea and vomiting. In some cases, aseptic meningitis (inflammation of the membranes that surround the brain) may occur. Protect yourself from midge and mosquito bites at all times. There is no vaccine or medication that protects against OVD. Insect bite and pest prevention Most travellers are at low risk. There are concerns that the Oropouche virus could be passed from a pregnant woman or pregnant person to their unborn baby, which might lead to serious problems like stillbirth or issues with the baby&rsquo;s head and brain development. Pregnant women, pregnant people, or anyone planning a pregnancy should discuss the possible risks of travelling to areas with Oropouche virus with their healthcare provider. The healthcare provider may advise you to avoid nonessential travel to areas experiencing an OVD outbreak. To find out if your destination is experiencing an ongoing OVD outbreak, check the top of the Health section for any travel health notices or outbreak monitoring alerts. Animal precautions Some infections, such as rabies, spread through direct contact with animals. Others, such as hantavirus infections and avian influenza, can also spread indirectly when people come into contact with areas contaminated by animal droppings or other animal waste. Certain activities can increase your chances of coming into contact with animals, their droppings, or their body fluids, like: travelling in rural or forested areas camping, hiking, or visiting caves visiting places where live animals are sold or killed for food, like wet markets To reduce your risk of getting sick: avoid contact with animals like stray dogs, livestock (such as pigs and cows), monkeys, snakes, rodents, birds, and bats. stay away from places where animal waste can build up, such as caves avoid eating undercooked meat Make sure to closely watch children; they are more likely to try to touch animals. Person-to-person infections When travelling, you can reduce your risk of getting or spreading respiratory infections, like the flu or COVID-19, by: staying at your accommodation and limiting contact with others if you&rsquo;re sick wearing a well-fitting mask, especially:&nbsp; if you&rsquo;re sick and need to be around others&nbsp; when you&rsquo;re at large indoor events or in crowded settings, like sporting events, concerts, and airports cleaning your hands regularly with soap and water for at least 20 seconds, or using hand sanitizer containing at least 60% alcohol covering your coughs and sneezes with a tissue or your elbow, not your hands Mass gatherings (large-scale events) Clean your hands to help reduce the spread of infectious diseases Respiratory infectious diseases: Reduce your risk To lower your risk of getting sexually transmissible infections (STIs), HIV, and mpox, you can: get vaccinated against mpox if you&rsquo;re eligible practise safer sex methods use barrier protection during sexual activity, like condoms and dental dams. Mpox vaccines Sexual health and travel HIV and AIDS: Travel health advice Medical services and facilities Good health care is usually only available in urban areas. Quality of care varies greatly throughout the country. You can access free health care at public hospitals and clinics. You will likely experience overcrowding, understaffing, longer wait times and medication shortages. Most doctors don't speak English. Public hospitals generally don't expect immediate cash payment. Private hospitals and clinics located in cities are often better staffed and equipped than public or rural facilities. Some doctors speak English. Private hospitals provide expensive medical care, require proof of insurance, and may often request immediate cash payment. Some public medical facilities in the state of Rio de Janeiro provide limited services due to a lack of funding. Private hospitals are fully operational. Emergency services can be slow outside of major cities. Medical evacuation can be very expensive, and you may need it in case of serious illness or injury. Make sure you get travel insurance that includes coverage for medical evacuation and hospital stays. Health and safety outside Canada Medical tourism Before leaving for medical travel, you should do your research, especially on: the health and financial risks the medical facility where the procedure will be performed language barriers, which can lead to misunderstandings about your medical care and conditions travel insurance that includes coverage for the type of medical procedure you will be undergoing You should discuss your medical plans with your primary healthcare provider in Canada before travelling. Most provincial and territorial health care programs are extremely limited in their coverage offered abroad. Make sure that the healthcare providers you choose are authorized by the Brazilian health authorities Ask to see the credentials of the healthcare providers Obtain a written agreement detailing the proposed treatment or procedure Useful links Travelling outside Canada to receive medical care If you become sick or injured while travelling outside Canada or after your return Medication Some prescription medications may not be available in Brazil. If you take prescription medications, you're responsible for determining their legality in Brazil. Bring enough medication for your stay Always keep your medication in the original container and carry a copy of your prescriptions Pack your medication in your carry-on luggage Travelling with medication Keep in Mind... The decision to travel is the sole responsibility of the traveller. The traveller is also responsible for his or her own personal safety. Be prepared. Do not expect medical services to be the same as in Canada. Pack a &nbsp; travel health kit , especially if you will be travelling away from major city centres. Back to top Laws and culture You must abide by local laws. Learn about what you should do and how we can help if you are arrested or detained abroad . Transfer to a Canadian prison Canada and Brazil are signatories to the Convention on the Transfer of Sentenced Persons. This enables a Canadian imprisoned in Brazil to request a transfer to a Canadian prison to complete a sentence. The transfer requires the agreement of both Canadian and Brazilian authorities. This process can take a long time, and there is no guarantee that the transfer will be approved by either or both sides. Drugs Penalties for possession, use or trafficking of illegal drugs are severe. Convicted offenders can expect long jail sentences and heavy fines, even if unknowingly carrying drugs. Pack your own luggage and monitor it closely at all times Never transport other people&rsquo;s packages, bags, or suitcases Drugs, alcohol and travel Child sex tourism Brazil is actively seeking to prevent child sex tourism. Several tourists have been convicted of offences relating to the exploitation of minors. The legal age of sexual consent in Brazil is 18. Prison sentences are severe. Child Sex Tourism: It&rsquo;s a Crime Dual citizenship Dual citizenship is legally recognized in Brazil. If you are a Canadian citizen, but also a citizen of Brazil, our ability to offer you consular services may be limited while you're there. You may also be subject to different entry/exit requirements . Dual citizens Driving Brazil has a zero-tolerance policy for drinking and driving. If the police suspect you of drinking and driving, they could confiscate your driver&rsquo;s licence on the spot. If convicted, you can expect heavy fines and jail sentences. Brazilian police may conduct periodic controls during the day and night, often to check for drunk driving. If you approach a police control, slow down and cooperate with the officers. You can drive in Brazil with a valid Canadian driver&rsquo;s licence for up to 180 days. You should carry an international driving permit. This official Portuguese translation of your Canadian driver&rsquo;s licence will help when dealing with local authorities. International driving permit Identification Local authorities may request to see your identification at any time. Always carry valid identification or a photocopy of it Keep a photocopy of your passport and visa in a safe place in case it&rsquo;s lost or seized Keep a digital copy of your identification and travel documents Imports and exports There are very strict rules regarding the importation and exportation of: antiquities business and communication equipment firearms medications tropical plants wildlife Brazil&rsquo;s Ministry of Health provides information about food items that you can and cannot bring to Brazil. Exporting to Brazil &ndash; Government of Brazil Smoking and vaping Smoking and vaping are prohibited in all enclosed public spaces. It&rsquo;s illegal to bring these items into Brazil: electronic cigarettes vaping devices vaping solutions If you have them in your possession upon arrival, customs officials could confiscate them, and you could receive a fine. Electronic cigarette regulations &nbsp;&ndash; National Health Regulatory Agency (Portuguese only) International Child Abduction The Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction is an international treaty. It can help parents with the return of children who have been removed to or retained in certain countries in violation of custody rights. The convention applies between Canada and Brazil. If your child was wrongfully taken to, or is being held in Brazil, and if the applicable conditions are met, you may apply for the return of your child to the Brazilian&nbsp;court. If you are in this situation: act as quickly as you can contact the Central Authority for your province or territory of residence for information on starting an application under The Hague Convention consult a lawyer in Canada and in Brazil to explore all the legal options for the return of your child report the situation to the nearest Canadian government office abroad or to the Vulnerable Children's Consular Unit at Global Affairs Canada by calling the Emergency Watch and Response Centre If your child was removed from a country other than Canada, consult a lawyer to determine if The Hague Convention applies. Be aware that Canadian consular officials cannot interfere in private legal matters or in another country's judicial affairs. Useful links List of Canadian Central Authorities for the Hague Convention International Child Abductions: A guide for affected parents Children and travel The Hague Convention &ndash; Hague Conference on Private International Law Canadian embassies and consulates by destination Request emergency assistance Money The currency of Brazil is the Brazilian real (BRL). Canadian bank cards usually work in ATMs. Credit and debit cards are widely accepted in cities, restaurants, and stores, but less so in rural or informal markets. ATMs are scarcely available in rural areas. Carry cash for small transactions and when visiting remote areas. It&rsquo;s difficult to exchange Canadian dollars in&nbsp;Brazil. Back to top Natural disasters and climate Wildfires Wildfires are common during the dry season, between May and September, particularly in: Amazonas Bras&iacute;lia Cerrado region Pantanal region Heavy smoke may deteriorate the air quality in areas near active fires. In case of a major fire: stay away from the affected area, particularly if you suffer from respiratory ailments monitor local media for the latest information follow the instructions of local authorities, including evacuation orders El Ni&ntilde;o 2026-2027 The complex weather phenomenon called El Ni&ntilde;o happens at irregular intervals of 2 to 7 years.&nbsp; Extreme weather resulting from El Ni&ntilde;o could disrupt travel and limit access to essential supplies. Stay informed of regional weather forecasts before and during your travels, and plan accordingly Ensure you have adequate insurance to cover the consequences of such events, including the disruption of travel plans Learn more about El Ni&ntilde;o Rainy seasons The rainy seasons extend from: January to July in the north October to April in the south and southeast April to July in the northeast Flash floods can occur outside of the rainy season. They can hamper overland travel, especially in rural areas. Roads may become impassable and bridges damaged. Travel conditions on mountain roads and on highways leading to beaches can be dangerous. Seasonal flooding can also reduce the provision of essential services. Power outages are frequent during the rainy season. Avoid the affected areas Stay informed of the latest regional weather forecasts Follow the instructions of local authorities Useful links Weather warnings &ndash; National Institute of Meteorology (Portuguese only) Severe storms outside Canada Landslides Landslides are becoming more common in Brazil and are the result of heavy rainfall. Heat and humidity Humidity and heat may be most severe during the hot season, from December to March. Know the symptoms of dehydration and heatstroke, which can both be fatal. Dry season&nbsp;and droughts Bras&iacute;lia and the country's interior experience extreme dry periods between May and October.&nbsp;Humidity levels can drop below 10% and heat levels rise significantly. Western Brazil can experience periods of prolonged drought, which can lead to water shortages. Stay informed of the latest regional weather forecasts and plan accordingly. Back to top Need help? Local services Emergency services In case of emergency, dial 911 or: police (military): 190 medical assistance: 192 firefighters: 193 Tourist police Rio de Janeiro: (21) 2332 2924 or 2334 6802 São Paulo: (11) 3120 4447 or 3151 4167 Salvador: (71) 3116-6817 Recife: (81) 3322-4867 Consular assistance During business hours: contact the office nearest to you. For emergency assistance at any time: contact the Emergency Watch and Response Centre in Ottawa. You can also call toll-free at 0-800-891-6614. Brasilia - Embassy of Canada Street Address SES - Av. das Nações, Quadra 803, Lote 16, 70410-900 Brasília, DF, Brazil Telephone +55 11 5509 4321 Fax +55 61 3424 5490 Email SPALOConsular-Consulaire@international.gc.ca Internet https://www.international.gc.ca/country-pays/brazil-bresil/brasilia.aspx?lang=eng Facebook Canadá no Brasil X (Twitter) @CanadanoBrasil Other social media @canadabra Embassy of Canada in Brazil Rio De Janeiro - Consulate General of Canada Street Address Av. Atlântica 1130, 13º andar, Copacabana, 22021-000 Rio de Janeiro - RJ, Brazil Telephone +55 21 3444 0300 Fax +55 21 3444 0319 Email rio-cs@international.gc.ca Internet https://www.international.gc.ca/country-pays/brazil-bresil/rio_de_janeiro.aspx?lang=eng Facebook Canadá no Brasil X (Twitter) @CanadanoBrasil Other social media @canadabra Embassy of Canada in Brazil Appointment Book your appointment online São Paulo - Consulate General of Canada Street Address Centro Empresarial Nações Unidas - Torre Norte, Av. das Nações Unidas, 12901, 16º andar, 04578-000 São Paulo - SP, Brazil Telephone +55 11 5509 4321 Email spaloconsular-consulaire@international.gc.ca Internet https://www.international.gc.ca/country-pays/brazil-bresil/sao_paulo.aspx?lang=eng Facebook Canadá no Brasil X (Twitter) @CanadanoBrasil Other social media @canadabra Embassy of Canada in Brazil Appointment Book your appointment online Useful links Register as a Canadian abroad Download the Travel Smart app --> View travel insurance information Read our Traveller’s Checklist Advice for different types of travellers What to do if things go wrong Travel Advice and Advisories archives --> Disclaimer The decision to travel is your choice and you are responsible for your personal safety abroad. We take the safety and security of Canadians abroad very seriously and provide credible and timely information in our Travel Advice to enable you to make well-informed decisions regarding your travel abroad. The content on this page is provided for information only. While we make every effort to give you correct information, it is provided on an "as is" basis without warranty of any kind, expressed or implied. The Government of Canada does not assume responsibility and will not be liable for any damages in connection to the information provided. If you need consular assistance while abroad, we will make every effort to help you. However, there may be constraints that will limit the ability of the Government of Canada to provide services. Learn more about consular services . Risk Levels &nbsp;&nbsp;Take normal security precautions Take similar precautions to those you would take in Canada. &nbsp;&nbsp;Exercise a high degree of caution There are certain safety and security concerns or the situation could change quickly. Be very cautious at all times, monitor local media and follow the instructions of local authorities. IMPORTANT: The two levels below are official Government of Canada Travel Advisories and are issued when the safety and security of Canadians travelling or living in the country or region may be at risk. &nbsp;&nbsp;Avoid non-essential travel Your safety and security could be at risk. You should think about your need to travel to this country, territory or region based on family or business requirements, knowledge of or familiarity with the region, and other factors. If you are already there, think about whether you really need to be there. If you do not need to be there, you should think about leaving. &nbsp;&nbsp;Avoid all travel You should not travel to this country, territory or region. Your personal safety and security are at great risk. If you are already there, you should think about leaving if it is safe to do so. Date modified: 2026-09-29 About this site Global Affairs Canada Contacts --> Travel and tourism Embassies, consulates and offices Contact Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada Contact the Canada Border Services Agency Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Manage life events About government Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy