Go to Body hankyoreh Links to other country sites 다른 나라 사이트 링크 KOREAN JAPANESE CHINESE All National North Korea International Eco-Business Culture Editorial-Opinion Search Search RSS ABOUT US   all  >  National For Korean trans teens, even using school bathrooms involves questions of safety Posted on : 2024-03-21 17:29 KST Modified on : 2024-03-21 17:29 KST Facebook 페이스북 Twitter 트위터 A youth LGBTQ+ support center is advocating for measures to be implemented to make schools more inclusive and safe
DDing Dong, a Korean LGBTQ+ youth support organization, hosts a presentation at the Canadian Embassy in Seoul on March 20, 2024, on research for improving laws and institutions for a more accepting school environment. (Oh Se-jin/The Hankyoreh)
“I tend not to go to the restroom [for fear of my gender identity being revealed]. I’ll just hold it in, and there have been times when it’s been really urgent and I’ve just left early.” — 16-year-old trans girl attending a boys’ school “I’ve found an out-of-the-way restroom that people rarely use, and I’ll only come out after checking outside the stall to see there’s no one there.” — 16-year-old trans boy attending a co-ed school   For most people, school restrooms and similar facilities are ordinary spaces for all school members to use. But with their binary divisions between “girls” and “boys,” school restrooms are an uncomfortable and intimidating space for transgender students whose gender identity is different from their outward physical appearance. On Wednesday afternoon, the youth LGBTQ+ support center Dding Dong held a presentation at the Canadian Embassy in central Seoul’s Jung District to share research findings on legal and institutional improvements to amend school practices that exclude and discriminate against LGBTQ+ students. To develop ideas for improvements, Dding Dong conducted a survey of transgender and genderqueer students between Sept. 24 and Oct. 7 of last year. Of the 86 who took part, 59 (69%) replied that they did not feel comfortable using school restrooms. The surveyed students described not drinking water to avoid having to urinate, waiting until there was no one in the restroom, and only visiting the restroom during class hours rather than break times. These patterns were based on fears of being involuntarily outed while using the facilities. These students were also found to suffer severe harassment at schools. In January, the Busan chapter of Asunaro: Action for Youth Rights of Korea published findings from a study of LGBTQ+ students attending elementary, middle, high, and alternative schools in the Busan area. Of the 208 respondents, 39% said that they had suffered mistreatment such as outing, teasing, insults, condemnation and violence in schools because of their gender identity or sexual orientation. As a first step in making schools more inclusive for LGBTQ+ students, Dding Dong advocated the inclusion of rules in the Act on the Safety and Maintenance of Educational Facilities, etc. stating that “facilities should be provided in such a way that [students] do not face discrimination on the basis not only of sex, religion, home region, country, or ethnicity but also of sexual orientation and gender identity.” The center also stressed the importance of amending the enforcement roles for the School Health Act to form a basis for establishing single-occupant “restrooms for everyone” that can be used regardless of gender, age, sexual identity, or ability, as well as amending the School Sports Promotion Act to establish a basis for providing single-person showers, changing rooms, and other athletic facilities along with dormitories suited to gender identity. Other suggestions were to expand the category of “violence in schools” according to the Act on the Prevention of and Countermeasures against Violence in Schools to include harassment on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity and to amend its enforcement decree to include content related to LGBTQ+, multicultural, disabled, and other minority students in surveys on violence in schools. By Oh Se-jin, staff reporter Please direct questions or comments to [ english@hani.co.kr ] Related stories ·  Despite progress, trans Koreans’ ability to update legal gender without surgery remains in courts’ hands ·  [Guest essay] Korea’s own “Don’t Say Gay” act ·  Korea’s first openly trans athlete hopes to prompt a discussion by competing as herself ·  [Exclusive] New Defense Ministry proposal would force Korean trans women into military service ·  [News analysis] Upholding Korean military’s sodomy law, Constitutional Court turns blind eye to homophobic basis 광고 Editorial・opinion [Editorial] To build back public confidence, Lee must address issues affecting everyday Koreans [Column] Korea-Japan cooperation still has a long way to go Trump has taken a wrecking ball to America’s democratic institutions [Column] Sending troops to Hormuz would be a fatal miscalculation by Seoul [Guest essay] A tribute to Gloria Steinem and her legacy in Korea [Correspondent’s column] Korea has its own ‘red lines,’ too [Column] An open letter to Kim Jong-un and Donald Trump [Editorial] It’s time to pump the brakes on AI’s development [Guest essay] What North Korea’s learned from six months of the Iran war [Column] Sending troops to Hormuz is nothing like sending them to Iraq Most viewed articles 1 CIA record confirms US ‘completely destroyed’ Seoul’s Haebangchon in 1950 bombardment 2 [Guest essay] A tribute to Gloria Steinem and her legacy in Korea 3 UN urges Korea to enact comprehensive law defining, prohibiting racial discrimination 4 [Column] Is “Afghan Girl” doing well? 5 Welcome to the era of K-pop without the K 6 [Exclusive] Seoul will need 16% rate of return on US investments to recoup principal 7 A future S. Korean track star with great potential 8 100 days after tragedy, families of Itaewon crush victims fight to keep new memorial up 9 Flying “new right” flag, Korea’s Yoon Suk-yeol charges toward ideological rule 10 [Column] Negotiating with bombs Privacy policy Terms of use Contact us 발행인:박찬수 편집인:권태호 04186 6, Hyochangmok-gil, Mapo-gu, Seoul, Republic of Korea © Hankyoreh Media Group All Rights Reserved.