ANNUAL REVIEW OF THE HUMAN RIGHTS SITUATION OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL, TRANS, AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
COVERING THE PERIOD OF JANUARY TO DECEMBER 2024

ITALY

ACCESS TO GOODS AND SERVICES

BIAS-MOTIVATED VIOLENCE

In June, a gay couple in Modena was denied a rental home
because the landlord specified a preference for a ‘traditional
family’ consisting of a man, woman, and child.

This year saw a troubling increase in the number and geographic
spread of bias-motivated violence against LGBTI people in Italy
compared to 2023, with incidents reported almost monthly.

ASYLUM

In January, six youths were surrounded and beaten by a group of
12 people in Palermo, Italy, in a homophobic attack.

In May, the list of “safe countries of origin,” which allows for an
expedited and more restrictive asylum process, was updated
to include four additional countries where homosexuality is
criminalised: Bangladesh, Cameroon, Egypt, and Sri Lanka.
In October, with ​​the approval of the new immigration decree,
Cameroon and Nigeria were removed from the list of “safe
countries”. This means that the current list of “safe countries”
features nine countries that criminalise homosexuality, with no
exceptions provided for at-risk groups such as LGBTI people:
Bangladesh, Egypt, Sri Lanka, Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco, Senegal,
Ghana, and The Gambia.
In October, a court in Bologna referred the question of the
definition of ‘safe countries of origin’ to the European Court of
Justice, requesting the Court to establish whether a country that
is overall safe for its general population can be considered safe
even if it perpetuates discrimination against specific minorities.

BIAS-MOTIVATED SPEECH
Italy’s Family Minister Eugenia Roccella criticised the declaration
promoting European policies in favor of LGBT+ communities. She
argued that the document’s advocacy for self-identification and
fluidity in gender is an “ideological constraint” and a denial of the
“inherent reality of biological sex.” Roccella emphasised her belief
in maintaining “gender binarism,” asserting that there are only men
and women.
During the Olympics, a hate campaign targeted Algerian boxer
Imane Khelif, while some public figures and politicians attacked
trans athlete Valentina Petrillo for her participation in the
Paralympics.
In Milan, homophobic graffiti targeting a teacher appeared on the
walls of a middle school five times in nine months.
In September, a teacher in Treviso was insulted by a student on
grounds of his sexual orientation. Although the teacher filed a
complaint against the pupil for insulting a public official, the court
dismissed the case due to the fact that sexual orientation does
not constitute protected grounds in hate speech legislation.

Back to index <-->

In March, two young men riding a scooter stopped, insulted and
then assaulted another young man in Scampia, in the province of
Naples. The two attackers shouted homophobic slurs at the victim
before assaulting him.
In May, a 22-year-old man in Milan was attacked and stabbed
for being gay. In Salero, Samir, a 32 year-old man of Honduran
descent, was physically assaulted and was subjected to
homophobic slurs.
In June, a gay couple was cornered and assaulted by three men
and a woman in Rome after their attackers noticed they were
holding hands. The attackers have since expressed remorse,
claiming that the confrontation stemmed from a traffic dispute
rather than discriminatory or homophobic motives.
In June, a makeup artist was attacked in Foggia, while, in Rome,
two young men subjected an activist and leader of the Gay Party to
insults before physically assaulting and threatening him.
In July, on Pride night in Cagliari, an individual was threatened
with a knife, kicked, and punched in a homophobic attack, while
during Naples Pride, two girls suffered head injuries as a result of
an LGBTI-phobic assault.
In August, a boy walking with his partner in Turin was punched in
the face by a group of strangers.
In August, two trans women were approached and attacked by a
group of about ten young men in Castiglione in Teverina, in the
Viterbo province. Despite the attack occurring in a busy square,
none of the bystanders intervened to assist the victims or halt the
violence.
In September, a 33-year-old gay man from Palermo, Sicily,
took his own life, overwhelmed by the fear of being judged and
discriminated against.
In September, a drag artist was attacked in Turin while walking
arm-in-arm with his boyfriend, causing him to be taken to
hospital.
In September, a 42-year-old man in Cremona was subjected to
homophobic insults before being struck in the face with a can.

In November, Italian content creator Sespo reported being
attacked while walking on the streets of Milan.

DATA COLLECTION
In May, a survey conducted by the universities of Verona and Pavia
highlighted dissenting opinions on LGBTI rights across the Italian
respondents. The survey revealed that 56.3% of Italians believe
Parliament made a mistake by rejecting the Zan bill in 2021, the bill
aimed to extend anti-discrimination protections to include sexual
orientation, gender identity, and disability. The majority (59.7%)
support simplifying the process for changing one’s gender marker
on official documents. 83.4% agree with recognising unions
between people of the same sex. Yet, there is a split on how this
recognition should be implemented: 56.8% support extending
marriage rights to same-sex couples, while 26.6% stated a
preference for civil unions.
In July, the Italian National Institute of Statistics (ISTAT) published
a book with their data on the ISTAT–UNAR project (2018-2023)
concerning labour discrimination towards LGBTI individuals and
diversity policy.
The results of a study on gynaecological health and LGBTI
identities conducted by Coming-Out LGBTI+ Community Centre
of Pavia and UNAR were published in September. The survey
revealed a lack of adequate training on gender nonconforming
identities and orientations, which precludes essential services to
a substantial portion of the population.

EDUCATION
In May, Laura Ravetto from the Lega Nord party introduced a bill
aimed at banning the teaching of “gender theories” in schools.
In September, the Culture Committee of the Chamber of Deputies
approved a resolution introduced by Rossano Sasso of the party
Lega, calling on the government to exclude any content related to
what is referred to as “gender ideology” in schools.
In October, the Undersecretary for Education, Rossano Sasso,
requested the closure of a course at the University of Sassari on
gender and queer theories. Undersecretary Sasso accused the
University of Sassari of promoting “gender ideology” with public
funds. The case also reached the Italian Parliament, leading to
controversy.
In October, the association Provita e Famiglia and the political
party Fratelli d’Italia criticised the University Aldo Moro of Bari, for
hosting a conference on same-sex parenting, for allegedly denying
children’s rights to both a mother and a father while promoting
surrogacy. Provita e Famiglia also expressed outrage over the
Back to index <-->

involvement of the university’s Rector, Stefano Bronzini, and the
university’s counselling centre, which connects students with
local LGBTI associations. Additionally, the association called on
the Minister of University and Research, Anna Maria Bernini, to
intervene and prevent Italian universities from using funds for
political and ideological purposes.

EMPLOYMENT
In September, Italy’s Minister of University and Research, Anna
Maria Bernini, requested an inquiry into whether a research
project on trans and gender-creative children (ages 7–14) met the
requirements of the public call won by one of the researchers
at the University of Roma Tre earlier in 2024. The request came
amidst a wave of hate speech and death threats targeting the
two researchers—a cisgender woman at the University of Roma
Tre and a non-binary person from the University of Bologna—
sparked by certain political parties and anti-gender movements.
The backlash extended to the researchers’ universities, with
accusations of promoting “gender ideology” and demands
for institutional action against them. In response, several
associations and the Rector of the University of Roma Tre publicly
defended academic freedom and condemned the attacks.

EQUALITY AND NON-DISCRIMINATION
In January, a statement from the Ministry of Education addressing
the Holocaust Remembrance Day failed to mention the
persecution of LGBTI people.
In March, Italy voted against a European Commission regulation
aimed at guaranteeing the cross-border recognition of same-sex
parents.
In May, during the traditional spring assembly with Italian bishops,
Pope Francis reiterated his stance against admitting gay men
to seminaries. He reportedly expressed concerns about what he
described as an inappropriate atmosphere within the Church,
urging bishops to exclude LGBTI people from seminaries.
In June, the Puglia region enacted new legislation introducing
structural measures to ensure equal rights for LGBTI people and
address discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender
identity.
In October, Senator Ivan Scalfarotto revisited the case of a
prison police officer who faced discrimination in his workplace,
the Vercelli prison. The officer was subjected to workplace
discrimination by his colleagues and a prison inspector due
to statements made by inmates about his perceived sexual
orientation. After receiving such statements – which were later
retracted – the inspector subjected the victim to a psychological

evaluation and reported him to his superiors. While the Regional
Administrative Court awarded the victim compensation, the
issue remains unresolved, with the disciplinary proceeding
against the inspector still pending and a parliamentary question
being submitted by the Italia Viva Party on his qualifications and
professional background.

FAMILY
The Court of Bergamo ruled against the National Institute for
Social Services (INPS) for failing to allow same-parent families to
apply for parental leave, citing this as an unjustified discrimination
against same-sex parents. INPS was given two months to update
its portal accordingly. However, instead of complying, the institute
appealed the ruling and did not modify its IT system for handling
administrative requests.
In February, the Court of Appeal of Milan ruled that only the
biological mother can be recognised on the birth certificates of
children of same-sex couples, obliging the non-biological parent
to pursue adoption for legal recognition. Earlier, the court had
invalidated the registration of a birth certificate for a child born to
a male couple via surrogacy, deeming it illegitimate. However, this
ruling established that even in cases where women use assisted
reproduction, only the biological mother is entitled to be listed
on the birth certificate. A few days later, the Court of Appeal of
Brescia took a contrasting stance. In the ruling, the court upheld
the validity of the birth certificate for a child with two mothers,
arguing that an “evolutionary interpretation” of existing laws is
necessary to address the gaps in legal protection for children.
In February, the Court of Appeal of Rome ruled against the Ministry
of the Interior, who in 2019 put out a decree mandating the use
of the terms ‘mother’ and ‘father’ on documents. The court ruled
that electronic identity cards for minors should reflect the actual
family structure by using “parents” or a similar inclusive term.
In March, the Padua court upheld the validity of birth certificates
recognising children as having two mothers. In doing so, the
court rejected a previous appeal from the Prosecutor’s Office that
sought to erase the legal recognition of non-biological mothers
or those who had not given birth. The decision emphasised that
protecting the minors’ legal status and familial recognition takes
precedence over the Prosecutor’s appeal.
In June, the Lucca court raised a constitutional question
regarding articles 8 and 9 of Law 40/2004 and article 250 of the
Civil Code, which currently limit legal parenthood status to the
biological parent by excluding the non-biological mother from the
birth records of children born through IVF. The deliberation was
anticipated for early December 2024, but no official statements or
rulings have been released to date.
Back to index <-->

In June, the Ministry of the Interior and the Venice Attorney
General’s Office filed a complaint with the Venice Court of Appeal
against the 39 decrees of the civil judges in Padua. In July, the
Venice Court of Appeal “froze” the proceedings in Padua, pending
the Constitutional Court’s decision on a similar case in Lucca.
In July, the Constitutional Court affirmed the status of de facto
cohabitants as full family members, declaring Article 230-bis of
the civil code unconstitutional.

FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION
In September, l’Espresso, a weekly news magazine in Italy,
dismissed Simone Alliva, a journalist recognised (also) for his
advocacy in LGBTI rights. Alliva alleged that he faced significant
pressure, insults, threats, and verbal assaults before being
dismissed.

FOREIGN POLICY
In June, Italy refused to support an open letter produced by the
United States and already signed by 37 diplomatic representations
denouncing LGBTI discrimination in Hungary.
In November, in response to the state-sponsored dissolution of
national organisations addressing LGBTI issues in Argentina, 30
Western ambassadors united under the “Diplomats for Diversity”
initiative, signing a statement affirming their support for the
LGBTI community. Notably, Italy’s Ambassador to Argentina,
Fabrizio Lucentini, did not sign this appeal.

FREEDOM FROM TORTURE, CRUEL, INHUMAN,
OR DEGRADING TREATMENT
In October, a 15-year-old boy, bullied and subjected to physical
violence by classmates because of assumptions about his sexual
orientation, decided to take his own life. According to testimonies,
the students taunted him and hit him in the genitals.

HEALTH
In January, the Minister of Health launched an investigation into
the Careggi Hospital in Florence, following a request by Senator
Maurizio Gasparri from Forza Italia party, regarding the use of
triptorelin, a hormone blocker, for trans youth. The investigation
threatens access to this life-saving treatment and risks shutting
down one of the country’s only services for trans adolescents.

HOUSING
In May, a LGBTI co-housing refuge was established by the Gay
Centre Association in Rome, marking the third LGBTI shelter in the
capital. This refuge will accommodate up to three LGBTI youths

who have experienced violence and discrimination.

reassignment surgery to ask for authorisation from the court.

In December, the National Network of LGBTQIA+ AntiDiscrimination Centre was officially established during the “Spazio
ai Cad” initiative. The two-day event, held on December 7 and
8, took place at Cassero in Bologna as part of the La Violenza
Illustrata Festival.

In August, Augusto Barbera, President of the Constitutional Court,
reiterated that parliament should address the legal status of
children of same-sex couples and recognise non-binary gender

INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT
In March, the Commissioner for Human Rights of the Council
of Europe released a report underscoring the trend of ultraconservative governments exploiting LGBTI people to bolster
their political standing under the guise of defending “traditional
values.” The report urged governments and authorities, among
them Italy, to develop and fund public awareness campaigns and
training programs to better educate the public about the rights
and experiences of LGBTI people.
In April, the European Parliament denounced the rise of antiLGBTI rhetoric within some European governments, expressing
concern about how such rhetoric undermines global efforts
towards the universal decriminalisation of LGBTI identities.
In July, UNAR finally issued a call for the selection of projects
aimed at establishing or strengthening centres against
discrimination motivated by sexual orientation or gender identity
In October, the Council of Europe expressed concern about the
rise of hate speech and xenophobia in Italy, urging the government
to adopt a plan to combat racism. After five years of monitoring
the human rights situation in the country, the European
Commission against Racism and Intolerance (ECRI) published a
report highlighting an increase in xenophobic rhetoric in public
discourse, particularly directed at refugees, immigrants, and
LGBTI people.

LEGAL GENDER RECOGNITION
The municipality of Turin introduced a policy allowing trans and
non-binary people to use their chosen name on the GTT public
transport card, aligning with their gender identity rather than their
registered name.
In July, the Constitutional Court, answering the referral of a local
court, ruled the request for legal gender recognition of non-binary
people inadmissible but has called on Parliament to address the
issue legislatively.
In July, the Constitutional Court declared unconstitutional the
obligation imposed on trans people who want to undergo gender
Back to index <-->

identities.

PARTICIPATION IN PUBLIC, CULTURAL, AND
POLITICAL LIFE
In November, the headquarters of the Mario Mieli Homosexual
Culture Circle in Rome were vandalised with homophobic graffiti
on its rainbow-coloured ramp. Lara Ghiglione, secretary of the
CGIL, expressed dismay, stating that the attack confirmed once
more the hostile climate in the country for LGBTI people.
In December, an LGBT+ Jubilee event organised by La Tenda di
Gionata was removed from the Vatican’s official website without
explanation. A Vatican official later clarified that its prior inclusion
did not imply official support from the Holy See.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
In April, Italy’s Prime Minister condemned surrogate parenthood
as an “inhuman” practice. As part of her intervention, she also
urged parliament to advance a bill that would criminalise Italians
who travel abroad for surrogacy, which is already illegal in Italy and
punishable by jail and fines.
In June, the Lega Nord party proposed an amendment to a bill
that aims to prohibit surrogacy, even when conducted abroad.
The bill proposed the introduction of imprisonment ranging from
4 to 10 years and fines between €600,000 and €2 million for those
involved in surrogacy. In October, the bill was signed into law,
allowing surrogacy to fall under the umbrella of “universal crimes”,
a type of offence which typically applies to crimes like genocide
or human trafficking, and extending penalties to Italian citizens
who seek surrogacy abroad. ​​The legislation, approved with 84
votes in favor and 58 against, ended up imposing fines ranging
from €600,000 to €1 million and prison sentences from three
months to two years. The law has sparked significant controversy,
particularly among human rights groups, who argue that the
law unfairly targets same-sex couples and infringes on personal
freedoms.


MORE INFORMATION ON WWW.ILGA-EUROPE.ORG