In Thailand, culture of compromise boosts trans rights Menü Startseite NZZ in English Anmelden International View In Thailand, a culture of compromise has boosted transgender rights While transgender rights have become a contentious issue in the West, the deeply conservative Thai government is making strides in areas such as transgender health care. Why is that? Andreas Babst, Bangkok 23.05.2025, 10.15 8 Leseminuten Hören 12 min Zusammenfassung Teilen Merken Participant in the Miss Tiffany's Universe 2025 event – a beauty pageant for transgender women in Pattaya, Thailand. Varuth Pongsapipatt / Imago Summary Thailand's conservative government has introduced progressive transgender laws, including free hormone treatments, with little opposition from the population. Transgender people in Thailand experience greater societal acceptance and hold higher positions in companies than is often true in the West, benefiting from a relatively long tradition of tolerance. Activists have made progress through compromises and by making economic arguments, for instance by collaborating with the government to make the country more attractive to LGBTQ+ tourists. Optimieren Sie Ihre Browsereinstellungen NZZ.ch benötigt JavaScript für wichtige Funktionen. Ihr Browser oder Adblocker verhindert dies momentan. Bitte passen Sie die Einstellungen an. An American and a Thai doctor are sitting on a stage in a hotel conference center near Bangkok's airport. They have been invited to speak about transgender health care to an audience of politicians and activists. The American doctor says that U.S. President Donald Trump's administration has cut funding for his studies involving transgender people. The Thai doctor, meanwhile, describes a newly founded network of doctors who are providing scientific advice to Thailand's government on the provision of hormones for gender-affirming care. In the U.S., much appears to be moving backward for transgender people. In Thailand, by contrast, everything seems to be moving forward. Natthineethiti Phinyapincha, who widely goes by the name Nikki, listens intently to the speakers. And she says quietly: «We're slowly becoming a safe haven here for trans people.» Early this year, the Thai government announced that it would invest the equivalent of almost 4 million Swiss francs ($4.8 million) to make hormone therapy free for thousands of trans people. This was a striking decision, particularly as Thailand's government is extremely conservative. Liberal political forces in the country are regularly outmaneuvered by the long-established royalists. Perhaps even more remarkable is the fact that the new provision triggered little discussion in the country. Indeed, it went almost unnoticed. Europeans familiar with the relentless debates about trans rights and health care in recent years will likely ask themselves: How is that possible? Natthineethiti Phinyapincha, widely known as Nikki, runs a consulting firm. Private Promoting trans people in business Nikki was born in very humble circumstances, sharing a single room with her entire family in a poor neighborhood in Bangkok. Today, the 37-year-old lives as a woman. «Compared to 10 years ago, society is much more accepting of transgender people,» she says. It's a cliché, of course: Thailand and its «ladyboys.» However, transgender people do navigate life in Bangkok, the country's capital, with far more ease than in most European cities. They don't attract stares, hostility or even compliments. They simply exist. «Thailand has a tolerant society,» says Nikki. In a 2019 study published by the U.N. , 88% of respondents in Thailand stated that they were accepting of LGBTQ+ individuals. A somewhat smaller share of 75% stated they would accept LGBTQ+ people in their own family. Thailand has a long cultural tradition of a third gender – the «kathoey,» who exist somewhere between the male-female gender binary. Kathoey traditionally worked in the film industry, in the beauty sector or as sex workers. Their roles in Thailand's popular telenovelas have long been similar: They have been depicted as dramatic, intriguing and usually unhappy in love. Nikki has outgrown the circumstances she was born into. Thanks to good grades and scholarships, she was able to attend better schools than her neighbors' children. She completed a master's degree at the University of Lugano, and worked in luxury hotels in Thailand. Today she runs her own management consultancy called Transtalents. She advises companies on how to recruit talented transgender people for management positions. Her network is slowly growing: It already includes 30 transgender women who hold management positions in a wide variety of companies, no longer just in the beauty and film industries. Nikki is a strong advocate for diversity, equity and inclusion, or DEI – three words that have become highly contentious in the United States under the Trump administration. She says she believes things have gone wrong in the U.S. in recent years. People and firms there engaged in «rainbow-washing,» and trans people were brought into companies simply because of their trans identity, she says. «I always tell people in my network: You should get a job based on your skills.» However, a person's trans identity should also not be an obstacle, she adds. Perhaps that is one reason why the debate in Thailand is less toxic than in the United States: Identity is not valued above all else. Nikki was required to wear pants instead of skirts throughout her entire school career, even though she identified as female from an early age, she says. One time, a teacher sent her to a summer camp that was supposed to make «a real man» out of her. «I couldn't care less about any of that,» she says, adding that for her, getting good things has often been tied to certain conditions – like the need to wear pants instead of skirts. «I decided to accept these conditions in order to achieve something. As an opportunity cost, so to speak,» she says. Thailand has a tolerant society. At least in Bangkok, transgender people can live freely. Matt Hunt / Imago First transgender woman in parliament In 2019, Tanwarin Sukkhapisit became the first transgender woman in the Thai parliament. Today, the 51-year-old has returned to her work as a filmmaker. She produces telenovelas that in part feature same-sex couples and transgender people – not all of whom are now unlucky in their love affairs. Telenovelas and social media networks have changed the view of trans people in Thailand in recent years, she says. Being trans has become more widely accepted, she adds. When Sukkhapisit was elected in 2019, the older members of parliament watched her closely, she says. How short was her skirt, and how low was her neckline? She disrupted the system, she notes, but nevertheless learned to use that same system to her advantage. She used her position to lobby for the approval of same-sex marriage. «At some point, politicians from the conservative party invited me to lunch. They wanted me to explain the concept of same-sex marriage to them in detail,» she says. She is still proud of this success today. In 2024, the parliament legalized same-sex marriage, making Thailand the only Asian country besides Taiwan to do so. Of course, not everything is good for transgender people in the country, says Sukkhapisit. People cannot change their gender legally in Thailand, which often leads to long review processes for trans people especially at airports, because the gender stated in their passport does not match their appearance. Generally speaking, however, things are getting better and better, Sukkhapisit says. She adds that she does not expect the West's culture wars to come to Thailand anytime soon. Battles of this kind are being fought differently in Thailand. Both Sukkhapisit and Nikki say that things sometimes don't move fast enough for them. It is exhausting having to explain themselves repeatedly to the conservative Thai establishment, they add. And of course trans activists still have larger goals: Many want the gender binary to be altogether abolished as a foundation of legal regulation. Tanwarin Sukkhapisit as a member of parliament in 2019. Lillian Suwanrumpha / AFP But Nikki also says: «It sounds trite: Thailand, the land of smiles. But it's true, we don't argue in public.» And preventing arguments means making compromises, she adds. «We always talk to each other. We lobby, we make compromises. That's how we achieve success,» Nikki says. Sign up for our free newsletter Reliable, independent reporting. Fresh perspectives on global issues. A trusted voice since 1780. What's your email address? Where do you live? - Europe Europe » Switzerland North America Central America South America Middle East Africa Asia Australia / Oceania (I do not want to share this) You can unsubscribe anytime. For more details, review our privacy policy . Subscribe for free Loading... Thank you! We appreciate having you on board. You have successfully joined our subscriber list. If you don't receive a welcome email within the next few minutes, please check your spam folder. Emails are sent from [email protected] – please add this address to your white list. Window of opportunity The new regulation on the free provision of hormones was preceded by years of lobbying. One of the lobbyists involved was the 46-year-old Naphat Krutthai, known as Jim. He works for APCOM, an organization that engages in transgender advocacy, among other functions. Transgender men like Jim are sometimes forgotten about in Thailand – the clichés are still dominated by the figure of the «ladyboy.» Jim regularly meets with government representatives, he says. «The collaboration has deepened in recent years,» he adds. Jim currently sees a «a window of opportunity» in Thailand, he says. An opportunity to generate change. This started in the 2010s, with a Thai government campaign that used the slogan «Go Thai, be free.» This was aimed at LGBTQ+ couples and transgender people all over the world. Come to Thailand on vacation, was its message: Here, you can be whoever you want to be. The campaign brought new tourists to the country – and drew criticism from Thailand's domestic LGBTQ+ population. Members of this community did not feel free, since they were not allowed to marry their partners, for example. They joined forces and began collaborating with the country's pro-democracy movement. That is when the window of opportunity opened. Thai authorities realized that LGBTQ+ tourists were bringing considerable sums of money into the country. And Thailand's activists realized that the government was willing to listen to them on how to make Thailand more attractive to these tourists. The same-sex marriage law and free hormone treatments were among the results. Or as Jim puts it: «We have to convince them in their own language.» In this regard, he does not mean the language of the activists, who wanted to talk about human rights and equality. The politicians instead wanted to talk about growth and the economy. «In the end, it leads to the same thing,» Jim says. Thailand wants to host World Pride soon. The event is something like the Olympic Games of Pride parades, a massive version of the celebrations organized by LGBTQ+ communities in cities around the world. Bangkok government representatives will observe this year's spectacle in the United States. In a few years, they intend the event to be the highlight of Thailand's positioning as a destination for LGBTQ+ travelers. Jim and other activists hope that they can still achieve some political successes before World Pride arrives in Thailand, if it does. Jim says he will continue meeting with government representatives, as he still has a number of unrealized goals. «But I also avoid telling them: Our lives are so bad, please pay more attention to us,» he says. «This is not about getting people to feel sorry for us.» Naphat Krutthai, who goes by the name Jim, lobbies for transgender rights for the organization APCOM. PD Forgiveness is important When asked why the Western culture wars have not spilled over to Thailand, Jim thinks it over. Of course, there are similar discussions in Thailand as in Europe, he says, for instance on the issue of which bathrooms transgender people should use. He himself doesn't have a final opinion on the matter, he says, adding that the topic can be endlessly debated. But perhaps that is another difference: the fact that the debate about transgender rights in Thailand does not get bogged down in details. On the stage at the hotel conference center in Bangkok, the American doctor brings up the topic of gender-affirming surgery in New York. Surgeons first had to be trained in the area, he says. And then administrators realized that transgender people were not coming to hospitals, he continues, so staff members were given sensitivity training. The next step was to ask hospitals to employ transgender people in order to create a more diverse environment, the doctor adds. It all sounds a bit complicated and somewhat fraught. The Thai doctor on stage agrees that staffing diversity in hospitals is important, without question. Then she turns to the audience. Not every hospital has staff members who have experience with transgender people, she says, so people have to be tolerant, and not take everything personally. Forgiveness is important too, she says. Contestants on stage at the Miss Tiffany’s Universe pageant in Pattaya. Lauren Decicca / Getty Please note that this story was machine translated with light editing by our editorial staff. Latest articles Below, you’ll find links to a selection of our free content. If you’d like access to all of our premium content via the full version of our newsletter, please upgrade here . Global reporting. Swiss-quality journalism. In today’s increasingly polarized media market, the Switzerland-based NZZ offers a critical and fact-based outside view. We are not in the breaking-news business. We offer thoughtful, well-researched stories and analyses that go behind the headlines to explain relevant events in the U.S., in Europe and worldwide. To produce this work, the NZZ maintains an industry-leading network of expert reporters around the globe who work closely with our main newsroom in Zurich. Sign up for our free newsletter or follow us on Twitter , Facebook or WhatsApp . Für Sie empfohlen Interview Der arbeitslose Swissair-Pilot von Rio 25 Jahre nach dem Grounding: «Es war eine leichte Befehlsverweigerung, was wir gemacht haben» Moritz Kaufmann 8 min Kommentar von Andreas Rüesch Akute Bedrohung oder nur Hysterie? In der Debatte um die Russland-Gefahr braucht es mehr Realismus 5 min Nach der Schlappe im Ständerat: Das UBS-Lager plant einen neuen Kompromiss – die Börse wettet auf einen Wegzug Beatrice Bösiger, Lorenz Honegger 4 min Kommentar von Benjamin Triebe Trumps Ziel ist erreicht: Die USA sind jetzt die wichtigste Ölnation. Den Preis bezahlen die Amerikaner an der Tankstelle 3 min Kommentar von Tobias Gafafer Debakel für Blocher: Das wuchtige Nein zu einer starren Neutralität stärkt dem Bundesrat den Rücken 3 min In der Schweiz ist Sprit doppelt so teuer wie in den USA oder Japan – das ist politisch so gewollt Thomas Schlittler, Florian Seliger 5 min 2260 Franken für einen Eingriff von 10 Minuten: Die neuen Arzttarife heizen die Kosten an und belohnen die Falschen Daniel Friedli 4 min Exklusive Daten zeigen: Die Klage über die Prämienlast ist übertrieben Matthias Benz 6 min Neueste Artikel Weitere Artikel 0:1 gegen Griechenland: Pleite bei Klopps Heimdebüt vor 23 Minuten 1 min Live-Ticker vor 30 Minuten Krieg in der Ukraine: Tote und Verletzte nach Luftschlag auf Vorort von Kiew +++ Selenski meldet 2200 russische Drohnenangriffe in einer Woche • Aktualisiert vor 30 Minuten 1 min Erstes amerikanisches WM-Gold seit Lance Armstrong: Brandon McNulty gewinnt überraschend das Strassenrennen in Montreal vor 1 Stunde 2 min Christoph Blocher gibt sich nach dem klaren Nein zur Neutralitätsinitiative kämpferisch: «Das ist der Anfang dieser Diskussion» Renato Schatz, Bern vor 4 Stunden 4 min Showdown um 40-Meter-Türme in Zürich: Stimmberechtigte schränken den Bau von Hochhäusern ein • Aktualisiert Francesca Prader 4 min Artikel von NZZ Bellevue Weitere Artikel Auf den Spuren des sri-lankischen Architekten Geoffrey Bawa in Weil am Rhein Lea Hagmann Andri Pols Blick auf die Welt im Buchformat – und weitere Dinge, die das Leben bereichern Sonja Siegenthaler Könnte der Café Gourmand das bessere Dessert sein? Wolfgang Fassbender Der Luxus liegt im Detail: Schmuck und Kleidung mit besonderer Verarbeitung Yvonne Wigger Green-Goddess-Salat mit Quinoa Myriam Zumbühl Kostenlose Onlinespiele Solitär Kreuzworträtsel Sudoku Mahjong Street Snake SudoKen Bubble Shooter eXchange Schach Doppel Power of Two NZZ abonnieren Kontakt AGB und Datenschutz Impressum Copyright © Neue Zürcher Zeitung AG. Alle Rechte vorbehalten. Eine Weiterverarbeitung, Wiederveröffentlichung oder dauerhafte Speicherung zu gewerblichen oder anderen Zwecken ohne vorherige ausdrückliche Erlaubnis von Neue Zürcher Zeitung ist nicht gestattet.