Trans People in China Face Barriers to Gender-Affirming Care There appears to be a technical issue with your browser This issue is preventing our website from loading properly. Please review the following troubleshooting tips or contact us at [email protected] . Close Skip to navigation Skip to search Skip to main content Skip to footer Foreign Policy Get analysis and alerts more quickly in the mobile app. Install Show expanded website navigation Back to Foreign Policy Magazine home page Latest Regions Asia & the Pacific China Middle East & Africa Americas Europe Newsletters View All Newsletters FP Live Latest Trending: Trump-Xi meeting United Nations General Assembly Website Search and Account Management Search Icon Search this website Search Search Preferences My FP Feed Saved Articles Newsletters Magazine Archive Subscription Settings FAQs Log Out Sign In Sign In Partner with FP at UNGA81 Partner with FP at UNGA81 Subscribe Subscribe Partner with FP at UNGA81 Partner with FP at UNGA81 Show expanded website navigation Deep Dive: In China, Gender Transitions Are a Family Affair Share icon Share Copy Link icon Copy Link Link copied to clipboard Email icon Email Facebook icon Facebook Bluesky icon Bluesky X icon X LinkedIn icon LinkedIn WhatsApp icon WhatsApp Reddit icon Reddit Save icon Save Create an FP account to save articles to read later. Sign Up ALREADY AN FP SUBSCRIBER? LOGIN Download icon PDF Downloadable PDFs are a benefit of an FP subscription. Subscribe Now ALREADY AN FP SUBSCRIBER? LOGIN Gift Copy Link icon Copy Link Link copied to clipboard Email icon Email WhatsApp icon WhatsApp Gifting articles is a subscriber benefit. Subscribe Now ALREADY AN FP SUBSCRIBER? LOGIN This article is an Insider exclusive. Contact us at [email protected] to learn about upgrade options, unlocking the ability to gift this article. Back to Foreign Policy Magazine home page Preferences My FP Feed Saved Articles Newsletters Magazine Archive Subscription Settings FAQs Log Out Sign In Sign In Partner with FP at UNGA81 Partner with FP at UNGA81 Subscribe Subscribe Partner with FP at UNGA81 Partner with FP at UNGA81 Latest Newsletters World Brief Editors' Picks Africa Brief China Brief Latin America Brief South Asia Brief Southeast Asia Brief Situation Report The Reading List FP Bookshelf FP Weekend The New Geopolitics See All Topics Trump’s second term Shadow government War in Ukraine Crisis in the Middle East U.S. foreign policy Trade and economics U.S.-China competition Artificial intelligence Regions Asia & the Pacific China Middle East & Africa Americas Europe FP Live See All Video Trump’s UNGA speech is more disturbing than you think Can AI companies still be profitable with regulation? See All Podcasts Illustration with Adam Tooze headshot on a green background with the text Ones & Tooze Ones and Tooze Illustration with a male spy headshot and the text I Spy I Spy FP Live podcast logo Foreign Policy Live See All Magazine Fall 2026 print Issue Fall 2026 print Issue Print Archive See All Collections Energy After the Shock The Trump Way The Scramble for Critical Minerals The AI Arms Race The Trade Wars See All FP Analytics In-depth Special Reports Issue Briefs Power Maps and Interactive Microsites FP Simulations & PeaceGames Synthesis Reports Insight Briefs & Spotlights Graphics Database See All Events Heart Failure in Focus September 29 Where we'll be this year See All Search Search Icon Additional Navigation Bluesky icon Follow FP on Bluesky X icon Follow FP on X LinkedIn icon Follow FP on LinkedIn Instagram icon Follow FP on Instagram Facebook icon Follow FP on Facebook FP SOLUTIONS FP Analytics FP Events FP Studios Simulations and Peacegames Advertise with FP Country Reports Subscription Services Your FP Account Group Subscriptions Reprint Permissions FP Magazine Archive Buy Back Issues EDUCATION Graduate Education Guide FP for Education Institutional Access ABOUT FP Writer's Guidelines Contact FP Meet the Staff Work at FP AI Policy Privacy Policy Do Not Sell My Personal Information Terms of Use Accessibility Bluesky icon Follow FP on Bluesky X icon Follow FP on X LinkedIn icon Follow FP on LinkedIn Instagram icon Follow FP on Instagram Facebook icon Follow FP on Facebook Foreign Policy Magazine is a division of Graham Holdings Company. All contents (c) 2026, Foreign Policy LLC, a unit of Graham Digital Holding Company. All rights reserved. Foreign Policy, 1099 14th St NW, Suite 500 East, Washington, D.C., 20005. Powered by WordPress VIP Deep Dive In China, Gender Transitions Are a Family Affair Beijing allows trans people to undergo affirming surgery and change their legal genders. But there’s a catch: Parental consent is required—at any age. January 23, 2025, 1:00 PM By Lavender Au , a writer from London who is based in Beijing. A person with long hair wearing a pink dress covered in bows stands amid other travelers on a train. Alice, who uses they/them pronouns, rides an underground train in Chengdu, China, on Aug. 30, 2019. They traveled to Thailand for gender-affirming surgery to avoid China's requirement for family permission. Hector Retamal/AFP via Getty Images Health Human Rights China the-dial-functional-tag This article is co-published with The Dial , a new magazine of international journalism and literature. Kevin Lee’s father used to grunt in affirmation if someone asked if Lee was a girl. He did the same if someone asked if Lee was a boy. Growing up in the 1980s in Guiyang in southwestern China, Lee was relatively withdrawn, in part because he didn’t know what gender he was. He was less sensitive than the girls, he said. But he looked different than the boys. Lee came out to his parents when they asked him about dating. He said he wasn’t interested in dating men and that he saw himself as male. They said “OK” and ignored the issue. Their response, Lee said, felt like being shoved back inside the closet. Kevin Lee’s father used to grunt in affirmation if someone asked if Lee was a girl. He did the same if someone asked if Lee was a boy. Growing up in the 1980s in Guiyang in southwestern China, Lee was relatively withdrawn, in part because he didn’t know what gender he was. He was less sensitive than the girls, he said. But he looked different than the boys. Lee came out to his parents when they asked him about dating. He said he wasn’t interested in dating men and that he saw himself as male. They said “OK” and ignored the issue. Their response, Lee said, felt like being shoved back inside the closet. It’s not uncommon for transgender people to get a negative reaction from their parents when they come out. But parental support is particularly crucial in China, where trans people need parental consent to undergo gender-affirming surgery and change their legal gender—even as adults. (If their parents are deceased, trans people must prove that to authorities.) These hurdles often make it harder for trans people to obtain care. Lee, who wanted to pursue the surgery, said he considered the consent requirement an effort to prevent parents from seeking legal or physical retribution against doctors. “They’ll make a scene,” he said of parents who may not support their child’s decision to undergo surgery. “There will be family members taking out knives to kill doctors. It will become a social issue.” That was one of the reasons Lee didn’t pursue gender-affirming surgery in China. “My mom is conservative,” he said. Though consent forms can be forged, he didn’t want her to go after the doctor who helped him. In China, the need to obtain parental consent for gender-affirming care forces families to resolve their differences about the procedure ahead of time, dealing with drama or disagreements inside the family. According to Cherry, an LGBTQ+ organization worker, who requested the use of a pseudonym to protect their safety, the requirement exists to avoid parents causing a stir at the hospital. It is also the product of a Confucian and patriarchal way of organizing society, Cherry said. For instance, police who want to put pressure on young queer activists often visit their parents’ workplaces and out them—so that the target has to deal with the ensuing family drama. “The person is managed through the family so they don’t become a problem in the public domain,” Cherry said. Two photos: 1. woman leaning one arm on the shoulder of a a seated older man in front of a table covered in plates. 2. A woman sitting on a bed in what looks like a hotel room passing paper to a small boy on the bed with lamps and a side table between them. Left: Dancer and TV presenter Jin Xing with her father in November 2000. Right: Jin with her son in a hotel bedroom in Hangzhou, China, in November 2002. Nian Zeng/Gamma-Rapho via Getty Images The first gender-affirming procedure in China was carried out in 1983. The process entered the mainstream consciousness when Jin Xing, a famous dancer and TV presenter, recorded her surgery in a documentary released in 2000 . Her father, a military officer, gave her his unconditional support. He even went to the local police station and demanded that they give Jin Xing a new ID card that reflected her gender. That kind of parental support is rare. A 2021 report by the Beijing LGBT+ Center, which was shut down in 2023, found that only 3.2 percent of fathers and 5.9 percent of mothers in China “completely supported” their children after they came out as transgender. Some conservative parents who do not accept their children’s gender identities send them to conversion therapy. A trans woman successfully sued a hospital last year for being subjected to electroshock therapy and being held against her will for three months. “People making policies lived through the Cultural Revolution,” Cherry said. “There’s a fear of not being the same,” they said, referring to the great emphasis placed on collectivism during that time. Xiaoma, who grew up in the small city of Huzhou in southeastern China and requested a pseudonym to protect her privacy, recalled that before the internet reached her town, her first encounter with trans culture came from tabloids sold by street vendors, which told sensationalist stories about trans people. In phone directories, she saw advertisements for gender-affirming operations alongside those for double eyelids and breast augmentations. When she came out to her parents and told them she wanted to get gender-affirming surgery, “there was crying, there was arguing,” she said. “There is a saying: Your body, your hair, your skin is from your parents,” said a doctor working in fertility who spoke on the condition of anonymity because she was not authorized to talk to media. Ties between generations are close: “Most parents will think you’re always their child and that they have authority over you,” she said. To her knowledge, gender-affirming surgery is the only surgery undertaken by adults in China that legally requires parental consent. Other major or high-risk surgeries, such as heart surgery, often require a family member’s consent, but it can come from another direct relative or a spouse. A bride extends a lace-gloved hand through an ornate fabric opening to shake hands with a man. A friend congratulates transgender bride Zhang Ling on arrival at her future husband’s home village of Fenghuang in southwestern Sichuan province on May 1, 2004. Goh Chai Hin/AFP via Getty Images Xiaoma’s parents eventually acquiesced to her gender identity, even offering to help pay for a better doctor for gender-affirming surgery than she could afford on her own. Still, she couldn’t bring herself to ask for their consent. “Acceptance is one thing. Asking them to sign a consent form is another,” she said, since it would require that they actively support her decision rather than simply tolerate it. Xiaoma instead traveled to Thailand, where she could get the surgery without asking for anyone’s approval. The barrier posed by parental consent has led to the growth of a gray industry of illegal surgeries and hormone replacement drugs in China. People exploring their sexuality and gender identity often turn to sources outside the public medical system for guidance. When Lee was looking into gender-affirming surgery, he turned to the online forum Baidu Tieba, which is similar to Reddit. He reached out to people posting about which hormone replacement drugs worked and which did not and bought the drugs they recommended. He joined a group organized by drug sellers on the social media platform QQ, where the group’s 1,500-plus members could purchase the drugs. Read More A gay student poses facing away from the camera with a rainbow flag draped around them on a sidewalk in Beijing. Thy are framed by trees, flower boxes and a river. A gay student poses facing away from the camera with a rainbow flag draped around them on a sidewalk in Beijing. Thy are framed by trees, flower boxes and a river. ‘Rainbow Hunters’ Target LGBTQ Chinese Students Crackdowns against gender and sexual minorities are terrifying activists. Report | Bibek Bhandari , Elgar Hu A Chinese flag flies behind razor wire A Chinese flag flies behind razor wire Congress Splits Over How to Address LGBT Rights in China A landmark report on human rights in China was delayed six months over a behind-the-scenes impasse on LGBTQ rights. Exclusive | Robbie Gramer , Mary Yang After taking the medicine, Lee felt strange, and his periods got heavier. When he complained about these side effects, the drug sellers pushed him to get surgery. They told them that unless he did, he’d still be a woman. He believed everything they said. “To put it nicely,” Lee said, “they brainwashed me.” Lee flew to Shanghai to visit the hospital where these sellers worked; he said he saw them sell the same medicine directly to another patient, a 16-year-old boy, in exchange for cash—far from standard procedure in Chinese public hospitals. Lee left and took a walk along the city’s waterfront, processing what he had seen. He turned it over in his mind. Something felt wrong. Lee sent the hormone replacement drugs that he bought to a lab for testing. The results revealed that they were substandard anabolic steroids made from a mix of veterinary drugs. “It’s like they sold me an iPhone but just a shell,” he said. “I didn’t know what brand of battery they replaced it with, and it could explode.” When Lee applied to study abroad in Australia, he didn’t initially pass the health tests required to obtain a visa because the drugs had affected his liver and kidneys. “I was responsible for my own ignorance,” he said. There have been some victories for China’s trans community over the past decade, such as winning a landmark work discrimination case in 2016. But it is still very difficult for trans people to change their gender on the education certificates often required by employers, which in effect outs them. Public medical insurance doesn’t cover hormone replacement therapy and gender-affirming surgery. A woman holds up a blue, pink and white striped flag which obscures their identity in front of a wall with gold Chinese characters on it. Behind the wall is a tree and multi-story building. A transgender woman poses with a trans pride flag outside the court house in Hangzhou, China, on Dec. 3, 2019. The woman said she was fired from her job after undergoing gender-affirming surgery. Hector Retamal/AFP via Getty Images In 2022, China released regulations that lowered the minimum age for gender-affirming surgery from 20 to 18 and removed a requirement that people undergo a year of psychiatric treatment before surgery. It also lowered the threshold for changing official ID documents: Though the Chinese government used to require that individuals had undergone full reconstruction of their sex organs, a person can now apply for a new ID after having their reproductive organs removed—a less complex surgery that nevertheless carries medical risk. However, those looking to change their IDs still face obstruction from local administrators, who are not always up to date on the regulations, slowing down the process. “I was very willing to go for surgery” after reading the new regulations, Lee said. He chose to have gender-affirming surgery in Thailand rather than in China, in part because he did not want to push for his parents’ consent when he knew they did not approve of his decision. He also wanted to avoid causing them more pain. “I don’t want my parents to be gossiped about on the street,” Lee said. “My parents live in a small city where everyone knows each other.” Lee flew to Bangkok and stayed in the hospital for four days. While he was undergoing surgery, he dreamed of Burger King. When he woke up, he had a hamburger and then vaped. The ensuing paperwork did not go as smoothly. After returning to China, he started the process of changing his ID card in the island province of Hainan, where he previously lived and was registered as a resident. It was the start of a legal tug-of-war. The administrators asked him to prove that he was a man. He asked them to prove that he was a woman. They found reasons to delay the process, and he had to keep flying back and forth from Guizhou in southwestern China, where he currently lives. At one point, Lee lost his temper and told the authorities that he would make a reel on Douyin, the mainland Chinese counterpart to TikTok, or talk to the media about his experience. He eventually received his new ID card. Audience members, many wearing kimonos, put hands to their face or cross their arms as they sit in rows of red seats in an auditorium, faces. illuminated by stage lights Audience members watch a performance of the Trans Chorus in Chengdu on Aug. 31, 2019. Members of the group share similar stories of their struggle with their transgender identities. Hector Retamal/AFP via Getty Images Though China leaves a route open for trans people to pursue gender-affirming surgery, the government actively discourages open trans activism and advocacy. Under its current leadership, China has seen a rise in nationalist rhetoric and heightened distrust of foreign influence, leading to a crackdown on international funding for local organizations, which often rely on such support. In 2016, the government passed the Overseas NGO Law , which made it more difficult for grassroots organizations to receive funding from international donors. Organizations such as Cherry’s, which received overseas funding before the law was passed, have had to shrink the scope of their work significantly. Before 2016, Cherry and their colleagues used to go to schools and universities to talk about sexual diversity. They displayed the Pride flag openly and organized rainbow-themed runs and cycles. The organization still helps transgender people who are looking into surgery, providing them with information on where to stay, which doctors are friendly, and which hospitals can provide the appropriate medicine. They also put on small-scale gatherings and carry out sexual disease prevention work. A person in a kimono-style dress and straw hat with flowers puts a hand to their face. In the foreground is the lower half of a person in a dress holding pointed feminine shoes in their hand. Xiaomi, who identifies as transgender, poses for a portrait in Shanghai on June 5, 2018 Johannes Eisele/AFP via Getty Images But the organization must now report any gathering with more than 10 people to the police for approval, which is not a given. Ahead of dates the authorities consider politically sensitive, such as International Day Against Homophobia, Biphobia, and Transphobia or International Women’s Day, Cherry’s organization receives calls from the police checking that it will not hold any events, according to people who work there. Advocating for the rights of sexual minorities and displaying symbols such as the Pride flag are increasingly considered by authorities as proof of foreign influence. “Anything involving the Pride flag is not allowed,” said Lotus, who works with Cherry and also asked to use a pseudonym for fear of political retribution. “There are many voices telling us to shut up,” Lotus said. A lot of people online take the attitude “We respect you—just don’t speak out.” Though the comments are made by private individuals, that social media moderators do not delete them shows that the comments reflect an “official stance,” they said. The main sources of funding for Lotus and Cherry’s organization are now state bodies, including the China’s Center for Disease Control and Prevention and the All-China Women’s Federation, which focus on AIDS prevention rather than trans advocacy. The organization can receive money from these bodies when their work aligns with that objective. Lotus gestured to a jar near where we were sitting in their office, which contained a miniature Pride flag alongside China’s national flag. “If we only put the Pride flag, there would be a problem.” A person with short spiky hair and wearing glasses talks on a phone while looking up. Two tall buildings out of focus are seen behind them. Trans Chorus member Fang Yuran walks to rehearsal in Chengdu on Aug. 30, 2019. Hector Retamal/AFP via Getty Images Lee now runs his own company, selling prosthetics to trans people. He drives a bright orange electric vehicle that bears a sign saying, “I’m a straight guy.” Despite the red tape that he encountered in his transition, Lee told me that he considers China’s policies to be friendly toward trans people. He pointed to other countries such as North Korea, where transgender issues are not formally addressed in law, or Russia, where trans people are not permitted to change their legal gender. In Thailand, trans people cannot change their ID cards following surgery. He acknowledged that many trans people were reluctant to acknowledge their past for fear of discrimination. He often fielded questions from other people in the trans community asking him how he dealt with showing his education certificates to employers. But since he is self-employed, he has not faced that issue. Lee had little contact with his parents before his surgery, and that did not change after he returned to China from Thailand. When I spoke to him in January, he said he planned to travel over the Lunar New Year holiday to Xishuangbanna in southwestern China. I asked him if he planned to see his parents, and he said he might see his father, that they might even travel together. He didn’t think his mother would want to join them. Health Human Rights China Lavender Au is a writer from London who is based in Beijing. X: @lavender_au Read More On China | Health | Human Rights | LGBTQ Rights Join the Conversation Commenting is a benefit of a Foreign Policy subscription. Subscribe Subscribe Already a subscriber? Log In . View Comment s Join the Conversation Join the conversation on this and other recent Foreign Policy articles when you subscribe now. Subscribe Subscribe Not your account? Log out View Comment s Join the Conversation Please follow our comment guidelines , stay on topic, and be civil, courteous, and respectful of others’ beliefs. View Comment s You are commenting as . Change your username | Log out Change your username: Username I agree to abide by FP’s comment guidelines . (Required) Confirm CANCEL Confirm your username to get started. The default username below has been generated using the first name and last initial on your FP subscriber account. Usernames may be updated at any time and must not contain inappropriate or offensive language. Username I agree to abide by FP’s comment guidelines . (Required) Confirm OTHER SUBSCRIPTION OPTIONS Academic Rates Specialty rates for students and faculty. Multi-year Lock in your rates for longer. Groups Equip your organization with powerful global intelligence. Stories Readers Liked Go to slide 1 Go to slide 2 Go to slide 3 Go to slide 4 Go to slide 5 Go to slide 6 Go to slide 7 Go to slide 8 Go to slide 9 Go to slide 10 A statue of a seated, bearded man with a bare torso and draped cloth around his waist, holding a scroll in one hand, positioned in front of a row of large classical columns. Realism Is Unrealistic By Matthew Kroenig An illustration of Donald Trump in a blue suit and long red tie gesturing with open hands in front of a grid patterned background with jagged red, blue, and black line graphs diving downward. Trump Has Peaked By Ravi Agrawal Five people sit in folding chairs pushed up against a wall, all of them on their phones and several looking board. Text on the wall behind them says "AI for Real" with images of robotic arms and household appliances printed around it. China’s Success Is Forcing a U.S. AI Rethink By Robert A. Manning , Giulia Neaher An illustration depicting a man submerged up to his nose in water. The wavy water is divided horizontally into three color bands that mimic a flag: white foam at the very top peaks, a deep blue middle section filled with bubbles, and a red lower section covering his neck and suit jacket. His blue eyes look upward with a wide, strained expression. As the Tide Turns Against Putin, Beware the Drowning Man By Peter Frankopan Negotiators from the United States, Canada, and five European countries converse after finishing the draft of the North Atlantic Treaty in Washington on March 18, 1949. Trans-Atlanticism Isn’t Dead—It’s Being Renegotiated By Alexandra de Hoop Scheffer A woman crosses a road in front of a mural depicting Russian President Vladimir Putin in Kashira, Russia, southeast of Moscow, on Oct. 16, 2017. The Western Myth of Russian Greatness By Christian Caryl An illustration of a vintage-style map featuring North America and parts of Europe and Africa. Overlaid on the map are 3D red brick walls shaped exactly like the borders of the contiguous United States and Alaska, casting long shadows to the right. America, the Once Global Nation By Odd Arne Westad A creative illustration against a pale yellow background showing a garden planter containing a dense green hedge. Five human arms emerge from the hedge, with four of the hands holding small flags of China, Russia, the United States, and the European Union, while the fifth hand holds the flag of India. Hedging Is the New Normal By Suzanne Nossel An illustration showing a pair of hands tightly wringing out an American flag. Water droplets shaped like missiles squeeze out of the twisted fabric and fall toward a puddle shaped like the map of Iran on a red background. U.S. Power Is Wrung Out By Hal Brands An aerial photo shows Doha in the booming petrostate of Qatar. For What AI Could Do to Democracies, Look to the Petrostates By Cullen Hendrix U.N. General Assembly A wide-angle shot of a large assembly hall filled with an audience seated at curved rows of desks facing a main stage. The stage features a prominent circular U.N. emblem on a textured, golden backdrop, flanked by two large video screens showing Guterres at the podium. UNGA Convenes With Uncertainty on the Horizon This year’s high-level gathering takes place as the Guterres era approaches its end. Analysis | J. Alex Tarquinio A group of five children sit side by side in the soft-focused foreground, facing each other in conversation. In the sharply focused background, a vast area of destroyed buildings and rubble stretches across the landscape beneath a clear sky. It’s Time to Update the U.N. Sustainable Development Goals Argument | David Miliband U Thant speaks during a session of the Security Council focused on the Cuban missile crisis. Back to Basics at the U.N. Argument | Daniel Forti A studio shot of an artifact displayed on a small wooden base against a solid blue background. The artifact features a large, rough-textured stone disk with an uneven edge. Embedded or emerging from the upper-left edge of the stone is a green, weathered metal emblem resembling the United Nations logo, including an olive branch and a partial grid pattern. The stone structure is mounted on two short black metal pillars attached to a polished wooden stand, which has a small white label on the front that reads "EXHIBIT 1: The United Nations". Why an Obituary for the U.N. Is Premature Essay | James Traub Trending Saudi Arabia Bribed the Wrong People By Nicholas Grossman The Houthi Advance Is About More Than Just Iran By Marc Lynch ‘Furious’ Is an Angry Show for the World of Epstein and Trump By Sarah Weinman What Machiavelli Would Say About Trump By Stephen M. Walt America’s Cosmic Bet on AI By Graham Allison Loading graphics Footer navigation Back to Foreign Policy Magazine home page Bluesky icon Follow FP on Bluesky X icon Follow FP on X LinkedIn icon Follow FP on LinkedIn Instagram icon Follow FP on Instagram Facebook icon Follow FP on Facebook FP SOLUTIONS FP Analytics FP Events FP Studios Simulations and Peacegames Advertise with FP Country Reports Subscription Services Your FP Account Group Subscriptions Reprint Permissions FP Magazine Archive Buy Back Issues EDUCATION Graduate Education Guide FP for Education Institutional Access ABOUT FP Writer's Guidelines Contact FP Meet the Staff Work at FP AI Policy Privacy Policy Do Not Sell My Personal Information Terms of Use Accessibility Bluesky icon Follow FP on Bluesky X icon Follow FP on X LinkedIn icon Follow FP on LinkedIn Instagram icon Follow FP on Instagram Facebook icon Follow FP on Facebook Foreign Policy Magazine is a division of Graham Holdings Company. All contents (c) 2026, Foreign Policy LLC, a unit of Graham Digital Holding Company. All rights reserved. Foreign Policy, 1099 14th St NW, Suite 500 East, Washington, D.C., 20005. Powered by WordPress VIP