Fiji PM says homosexuality a sin Open accessibility guide Skip to sections navigation Skip to content Skip to footer Log in Our network Log in Expand navigation menu Search The Sydney Morning Herald logo The Sydney Morning Herald logo Advertisement World This was published 21 years ago Fiji PM says homosexuality a sin April 14, 2005 — 3:49am Save You have reached your maximum number of saved items. Remove items from your saved list to add more. Share A A A Fiji Prime Minister Laisenia Qarase has rejected international pressure to make gay sex legal in the conservative Christian nation, saying homosexuality was a sin. Human rights groups and the Australian Greens have criticised Fiji's sodomy law after an Australian tourist and a Fiji man were given two-year jail sentences last week for having sex. But Qarase said the Bible clearly stated that homosexuality was a sin and Fiji's law reflected that. Advertisement He told a radio station that local and international critics should respect Fiji's law and not interfere in the country's legal process. Qarase said people should realise that the convicted pair had also been making pornography. Advertisement Thomas Maxwell McCoskar, 55, and Dhirendra Nadan, 23, were freed on bail on Tuesday after appealing their convictions in a Fijian high court. Lawyers for the pair argue that Fiji's Constitution, which outlaws discrimination based on sexual orientation, overrides the Pacific nation's penal code. Homosexual acts carry a maximum sentence of 14 years but have been rarely enforced in Fiji. Advertisement Protests against the convictions have been held in Fiji and Australia. "The Greens are calling on the Australian government to convey this concern to the Fijian government and send a clear message that Australia considers discrimination on the grounds of sexuality as inappropriate as racism," Australian Greens senator Kerry Nettle said. Save You have reached your maximum number of saved items. Remove items from your saved list to add more. Share License this article From our partners Advertisement Advertisement The Sydney Morning Herald logo Twitter Facebook Instagram RSS Our Sites Open Our Sites section The Sydney Morning Herald The Age Brisbane Times WAtoday The Australian Financial Review nine.com.au Drive Classifieds Open Classifieds section Tributes Place your ad The Sydney Morning Herald Open The Sydney Morning Herald section Contact & support Advertise with us Newsletters Accessibility guide Sitemap Photo sales Purchase front pages Content licensing Work with us Terms of use Privacy policy Press Council Charter of Editorial Independence AI Editorial Guidelines Products & Services Open Products & Services section Subscription packages My account Subscriber FAQs Delivery status Today’s Paper Good Food Guide Daily Puzzles Copyright © 2026 Subscribe