Safety and Diversity: Spain as a reference for LGB… | tourspain.es in english Search About us Our organisation Transparency Work with us What we do Strategic marketing plan Operating plans Marketing and communication Marketing support Tourism knowledge Cultural Heritage Conservation – PRTR Office network See map of offices Asia-Pacífico y Oriente Medio Abu Dhabi (Emiratos Árabes) Mumbai (India) Singapore (Singapore) Asia-Pacífico Cantón (China) Pekín (China) Tokio (Japón) Europa Central Berlín (Alemania) Bruselas (Bélgica) Frankfurt (Alemania) La Haya (Países Bajos) Munich (Alemania) Viena (Austria) Zúrich (Suiza) Europa del Este Moscú (Rusia) Varsovia (Polonia) Europa del Norte Copenhague (Dinamarca) Dublín (Irlanda) Estocolmo (Suecia) Helsinki (Finlandia) Londres (Reino Unido) Oslo (Noruega) Europa del Sur y Mediterraneo Lisboa (Portugal) Milán (Italia) París (Francia) Roma (Italia) Iberoamérica Buenos Aires (Argentina) Miami (Estados Unidos) Ciudad de México (México) Sao Paulo (Brasil) Norteamerica Chicago (Estados Unidos de América) Los Ángeles (Estados Unidos) Miami (Estados Unidos) Nueva York (Estados Unidos) Toronto (Canadá) Knowledge Media Press office Multimedia resources Events English Español Home Safety and Diversity: Spain as a reference for LGBTQ+ Tourism From specialized accommodations to inclusive events and beaches, Spain offers diverse and quality experiences. Spain has established itself as one of the preferred destinations for the LGBTQ+ community worldwide, thanks to inclusive policies, a diverse tourism offer and a climate of social acceptance that stands out from other countries. According to the Homophobic Climate Index (HCI) and the Travel Safety Index (TSI), the country is one of the safest and most welcoming for this segment of travelers. LGBTQ+ tourists value destinations with advanced legislation on rights, such as equal marriage and anti-discrimination policies, and with a varied offer of events and celebrations. Spain complies with this and adds a quality infrastructure, with specialized accommodations, nightlife, fine dining, inclusive beaches and accessible options for all. Pride flag at Madrid City Hall 2024 © Madrid Orgullo by Juan Tejada Festivities such as Madrid Pride, considered one of the most important in the world, Gay Pride Sitges or Maspalomas Gay Pride, together with the calendar of concerts, parades and the offer of exclusive stores, reinforce the country as a reference. In addition, Spain has a Network of Destinations for Diversity that works to create open, safe, welcoming and discrimination-free spaces. LGBT flag on the island of Gran Canaria on the occasion of Maspalomas Gay Pride © Shutterstock The 8 most chosen destinations Madrid , with the Chueca neighborhood as an LGBTQ+ center, stands out for its vibrant atmosphere, cultural events, history and gastronomy. Barcelona : Modern and avant-garde, it stands out for the Circuit Festival and Pride Barcelona and for its wide cultural and leisure offer. Valencia : It combines tradition and innovation, offering a tolerant and diverse environment, with spaces such as the Carmen neighborhood and the Patacona beach. Seville : Known for its rich history, it annually celebrates the Pride of the South, a festive event that attracts thousands of people. Cadiz : It offers a mixture of history and attractive beaches, being its carnival one of the most recognized worldwide. Canary Islan ds : They stand out for their privileged climate and events such as the Maspalomas Gay Pride in Gran Canaria. Sitges : It is famous for its bohemian atmosphere and its active cultural life, including its famous carnival. Torremolinos : Benchmark of LGTBI tourism on the Costa del Sol, with a specific area called La Nogalera and the annual celebration of Torremolinos Pride. Share Facebook Twitter E-mail Accessible mode Our websites: Spain.info Knowledge Secretary of State for Tourism E-office Contact Accessibility Legal notice Data protection Cookies Site map © 2026 INSTITUTO DE TURISMO DE ESPAÑA – TURESPAÑA C/Poeta Joan Maragall 41, 28020 MADRID, SPAIN.