After 10 Years of Legal Battles, Mozambique’s Only LGBT Organization Takes a Step Closer to Legal Recognition · Global Voices Skip to main content WE NEED YOUR HELP Global Voices is at a critical moment. Without the support of readers like you, we won’t be able to continue our 20-year legacy of ad-free multilingual journalism. Learn why » Donate English Ελληνικά Nederlands Español русский Italiano Português Igbo 日本語 Català Română srpski македонски বাংলা Yorùbá عربي Aymara Français Esperanto Malagasy ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Hrvatski українська नेपाली 繁體中文 Maayat'aan हिन्दी bahasa Indonesia Қазақша Български Deutsch Filipino ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Shqip فارسی 简体中文 한국어 Magyar polski اردو Dansk ଓଡ଼ିଆ Swahili čeština Türkçe Svenska Ўзбекча አማርኛ كوردی မြန်မာ עברית Tetun ភាសាខ្មែរ دری Africa Americas Asia Europe Elections Culture Human Rights Digital Activism All topics » After 10 Years of Legal Battles, Mozambique's Only LGBT Organization Takes a Step Closer to Legal Recognition Written (Português) by Dércio Tsandzana Translated (English) by Liam Anderson Read this post in Malagasy , русский , Français , Ελληνικά , Italiano , Español , Português Translation posted 28 November 2017 9 years ago Members of Lambda at an event in 2013. Photo: Lambda/Flickr, published with permission. Lambda, Mozambique’s only organization for lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) rights, took an important step towards legal recognition, which it has struggled with for over a decade. The Constitutional Council of Mozambique – equivalent to the Supreme Court – ruled that the status of Lambda did not violate the republic’s constitution, as had been alleged by government officials. Since 2008, Lambda had successive applications for formal registration as an association ignored by the Ministry of Justice, the body responsible for the registration of civil society organizations. According to the activists, government officials had said informally that the request could not be processed because it went against a clause of the 1991 Law on Associations. That particular clause blocked the registration of organizations which pursue aims that are contrary “to the moral, social, and economic order of the country and offend the rights of others or the public good”. On 31 October, the Council declared the clause to be unconstitutional for contradicting the constitution’s Article 52, which says that “armed organizations which are military or paramilitary and those which promote violence, racism, xenophobia, or which pursue aims contrary to the law are prohibited”. The Council ruled that those are the only kind of associations prohibited from registering. The Council’s decision did not mention specific associations, but according to Lambda’s executive director, Danilo da Silva, the ruling finally opens the door for the organization’s legal recognition. He told German broadcaster Deutsche Welle: “Este posicionamento do Conselho Constitucional vem de alguma forma desarmar esta justificação que informalmente era-nos passada”. This stance of the Constitutional Council to some measure disarms this justification which was given to us informally. LGBT rights in Africa The legalization of Lambda adds to the gradually more favourable environment for Mozambique’s LGBT population, one of the few countries in Africa where homosexuality is not a crime. For example, in Sudan, and parts of Nigeria and Somalia, homosexuality is punishable by the death penalty, and life imprisonment in Uganda, Tanzania, and Sierra Leone. The former Portuguese colonies are among the most tolerant countries for LGBT people. Cape Verde, for example, was the second to decriminalize homosexuality, in 2004, and one of only six African countries to sign a document in 2008 from the UN’s General Assembly condemning violations of sexual minorities’ rights. Some Cape-Verdean jurists also argue that parts of the Civil Code that restrict marriage to only people of the opposite sex are unconstitutional because they predate the constitution’s promulgation. The documentary “ Tchindas ”, which told the story of Tchinda Andrade, a prominent transgender activist in the country, won various international awards in 2016. However, even in less restrictive countries, the LGBT population is not free from prejudice and violence. In Angola, where the law is vague when in comes to homosexual activity, the LGBT community lives anonymously and faces discrimination in access to healthcare and education, according to Carlos Fernandes, director of Associação Iris Angola. Generally, the decision of Mozambique’s Constitutional Council received pushback from some sectors of society. On a much-commented online post by journalist Ericino de Salema, for example, many spoke out against Lambda’s recognition and homosexuality itself. Danilo da Silva, Lambda’s executive director, responded in a post to those comments: Vejo muito ressentimento naqueles que querem usar do poder coesivo do Estado para fazer valer os seus preconceitos. É uma pena pois viver em sociedade é saber respeitar os outros, mesmo que não simpatizemos com as suas escolhas de vida, desde que estas não nos afectem. Direitos fundamentais são direitos de todos os moçambicanos, não são privilégios para alguns. Vamos tod@s aproveitar a oportunidade para aprender com aquele acórdão que não é só uma vitória para as pessoas LGBT, mas para todos que são e tem ideias diferentes. Aquele acórdão é um ode à igualdade, a paz e a harmonia social. Hoje estou muito orgulhoso de ser moçambicano. I see a lot of resentment in those who want to use the coercive power of the state to enforce their prejudices. It is a shame since living in a society is knowing how to respect others, even if we do not sympathize with their life choices, as long as they do not affect us. Fundamental rights are rights for all Mozambicans, they are not privileges for some. Let us all take the opportunity to learn from this ruling that it is not only a victory for LGBT people, but for all who are different and have different ideas. That ruling is an ode to equality, peace, and social harmony Today I am very proud to be Mozambican. Categories Regions Sub-Saharan Africa Mozambique Topics Citizen Media Good News Human Rights Law LGBTQ+ Women & Gender Written (Português) by Dércio Tsandzana Translated (English) by Liam Anderson Support our work Global Voices stands out as one of the earliest and strongest examples of how media committed to building community and defending human rights can positively influence how people experience events happening beyond their own communities and national borders. Please consider making a donation to help us continue this work. Donate now Recent Sub-Saharan Africa Stories What #EndSARS left behind in Nigeria: A generation caught between protest, politics, and departure Written by Guest Contributor 13 hours ago How Togolese people are reinventing political protest amid civil society crackdown Written by Jean Sovon 1 week ago The long journey from ‘Indigenous’ to citizen in Mozambique Written by Tirso Sitoe Translated by Tirso Sitoe 2 weeks ago More » Top World Stories Movement from behind your gadget Written by Juliana Harsianti 2 days ago Support Global Voices’ Spotlight: Big Tech and Authoritarianism Written by Global Voices Announcements 3 days ago Young Japanese find new outlets for peace activism amid rising tensions in the Pacific Written by Jo Carter 3 days ago 1 comment antalya gezilecek yerler Very useful article. Everyone read this. Thanks. 2 December 2017, 12:52 pm Reply to this Cancel this reply Join the conversation Authors, please log in » Name (required) Email (will not be published) (required) Website Subscribe to comments on this post via email Guidelines All comments are reviewed by a moderator . Do not submit your comment more than once or it may be identified as spam. Please treat others with respect . Comments containing hate speech, obscenity, and personal attacks will not be approved. Δ Menu About Us What Is Global Voices? Our People Join Us! Partner with Global Voices Donate Contact Translation Services Sponsors Advox Civic Media Observatory Lingua Rising Voices Global Climate Justice Fellowship 2025 Global Climate Justice Fellowship 2024 Receive great stories from around the world directly in your inbox. Stay up to date about Global Voices and our mission. See our Privacy Policy for details. Newsletter powered by Mailchimp ( Privacy Policy and Terms ). Email Address Email Frequency Daily Weekly Announcements Alternative Email: unsubscribe from list Sponsors Global Voices is supported by the efforts of our volunteer contributors, foundations, donors and mission-related services. For more information please read our Fundraising Ethics Policy . Special thanks to our many sponsors and funders . Please support our important work: Donate » This site is licensed as Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 . Please read our attribution policy to learn about freely redistributing our work Some Rights Reserved Other languages Aymara Català Dansk Deutsch English Español Esperanto Filipino Français Hrvatski Igbo Italiano Maayat'aan Magyar Malagasy Nederlands Português Română Shqip Svenska Swahili Tetun Türkçe Yorùbá bahasa Indonesia polski srpski čeština Ελληνικά Ўзбекча Български македонски русский українська Қазақша עברית اردو دری عربي فارسی كوردی नेपाली हिन्दी বাংলা ਪੰਜਾਬੀ ଓଡ଼ିଆ မြန်မာ አማርኛ ភាសាខ្មែរ ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ 日本語 简体中文 繁體中文 한국어 See all those languages? The Lingua project at Global Voices works to bring down barriers to understanding through translation. Learn more about Lingua » Close Close What Is Global Voices? Our People Join Us! Partner with Global Voices Donate Contact Translation Services Sponsors Advox Civic Media Observatory Lingua Rising Voices Global Climate Justice Fellowship 2025 Global Climate Justice Fellowship 2024 Topics Caribbean Central Asia & Caucasus East Asia Eastern & Central Europe Latin America North America Oceania South Asia Sub-Saharan Africa West Asia & North Africa Western Europe Elections Culture Human Rights Digital Activism All topics » Receive great stories from around the world directly in your inbox. Stay up to date about Global Voices and our mission. See our Privacy Policy for details. Newsletter powered by Mailchimp ( Privacy Policy and Terms ). Email Address Email Frequency Daily Weekly Announcements Alternative Email: unsubscribe from list Sponsors Global Voices is supported by the efforts of our volunteer contributors, foundations, donors and mission-related services. For more information please read our Fundraising Ethics Policy . Special thanks to our many sponsors and funders . Please support our important work: Donate » Close Email this to a friend Recipient email address Your e-mail address Your name Please leave this field Empty Message Check out this story, I think you will find it interesting. -- Global Voices &middot; After 10 Years of Legal Battles, Mozambique&#39;s Only LGBT Organization Takes a Step Closer to Legal Recognition https://globalvoices.org/2017/11/28/after-10-years-of-legal-battles-mozambiques-only-lgbt-organization-takes-a-step-closer-to-legal-recognition/ Send » Close Email this to a friend Recipient email address Your e-mail address Your name Please leave this field Empty Message Check out this story, I think you will find it interesting. -- Global Voices &middot; After 10 Years of Legal Battles, Mozambique&#39;s Only LGBT Organization Takes a Step Closer to Legal Recognition https://globalvoices.org/2017/11/28/after-10-years-of-legal-battles-mozambiques-only-lgbt-organization-takes-a-step-closer-to-legal-recognition/ Send » Close