Support Support News Data Research Video Photo Scrollytelling Online Opinions Interviews Stories Analytics Categories Economy Society Politics Culture Sports Europe War in Ukraine Russia Without Censorship Newsletters All Front Page Undesirable Zekletter Aiz un ārpus robežas Novaya Gazeta Europe About the Project Читайте на русском Authors Support Archive of Issues Cookie Policy Privacy Terms of Use Found an error? Report it! Support Support News Society Russian bar employees sentenced to up to seven years in country's first ‘LGBT extremism’ case Novaya Gazeta Europe June 29, 2026 Photo: Ural56 on Telegram The owner and two employees of a gay bar in Russia's Orenburg region have been sentenced to prison terms in the country's first known criminal case targeting the so-called “international LGBT movement”, which Russia's Supreme Court outlawed as an “extremist organisation” in 2023. According to the court’s press service , Vyacheslav Khasanov, the owner of the Pose bar, received the harshest sentence — seven years — and was also ordered to forfeit more than a million rubles deemed “proceeds of criminal activity”. The bar's manager, Diana Kamilyanova, was sentenced to six years and three months, while its art director, Alexander Klimov, was given two years and three months. All three defendants were charged with participating in the activities of an “extremist organisation”. All of them pleaded not guilty. The case was opened in March 2024, the first prosecution of its kind following the Supreme Court's November 2023 ruling branding the “international LGBT movement” as “extremist”. After their arrests, all three defendants were placed on Russia's registry of “extremists and terrorists”. The complaints that triggered the investigation were filed by activists from the Orenburg branch of the far-right nationalist group Russian Community. The Supreme Court decision marked a major escalation in the Russian state's repression of LGBTQ people, paving the way for new raids on gay clubs, the closure of rights organisations, and prosecutions over symbols as simple as a rainbow. Novaya Gazeta Europe exclusively for Novaya Gazeta Europe
Share Link copied! More on the topic Stories Society ‘Books are at the heart of everything’ Pioneer Summer sparked a wave of censorship in Russia. Now it’s part of a growing literary resistance. Topics Society
More news Russia arrests Estonian man visiting wife whose EU asylum claim was denied September 25 Kazakhstan court rejects asylum appeal of former Navalny volunteer, clearing way for extradition to Russia September 24 CIA warned Italy, Spain and France of possible Russian drone attacks, Spanish media reports September 24 Czech Republic expels Russian propagandists who came to film ‘documentary series’ on Europe September 23 Russian man given 14 days in jail after writing ‘Putin is a dickhead’ on election ballot September 22 Putin's party would have won only 34% without ballot stuffing, statistical analysis suggests September 22 Readers' choice Most popular articles from the last two weeks Data Interactive map: Attacks on Russian territory, updated in real time As Ukraine fights back, the war has spread to at least 60 Russian regions Alesya Sokolova Ksenia Storozheva June 18 Stories ‘We are Russians, and God is with us!’ Moscow’s ultranationalist march is effectively back, rebranded as a religious procession. Here’s what it looked like this year. Vladislav Lisitsyn September 11 Interviews Is modern Russia fascist? Historian and political theorist Roger Griffin on the Putin regime, the hallmarks of fascism and the perils of dwelling on ‘taxonomy’ Vlad Dokshin Milana Ochirova September 24
Sections News Data Research Video Podcasts Photo Scrollytelling Online Opinions Interviews Stories Analytics Video & Podcasts Terrible News Interviews Categories Economy Society Politics Culture Sports Europe War in Ukraine Russia Without Censorship Newsletters All Front Page Undesirable Zekletter Aiz un ārpus robežas Novaya Gazeta Europe About the Project Читайте на русском Authors Support Archive of Issues Cookie Policy Privacy Terms of Use Contacts General Questions [email protected] Advertising: [email protected] Social Media X (Twitter) Instagram Novaya Gazeta Europe, 2026, Editor-in-Chief Kirill Martynov Found an error? Select it and press Ctrl+Enter to report it to us Found an error? Thank you! We will look into the error.