Austria recognises third gender option in official documents | PinkNews About Us Advertise Work with us Login Register Latest News View all UK US World Health Politics Sport Business Culture View all TV Film Celebrity Drag Theatre Music Gaming Lifestyle View all Beauty Careers Fashion Relationships Travel Shopping View all Deals Recommended Fashion & Beauty Tickets Video View all News & Politics Entertainment Lifestyle Discover Trans Awareness Week Drag Race Explainers The Queer Agenda Toggle menu Account Register Login Current Affairs Austria recognises third gender option in official documents May 14 2019 Written by Sofia Lotto Persio Share Save for later Comment Intersex activist Alex Jurgen (R) received Austria’s first-ever documents recognising a third gender. (Supplied) An Austrian intersex activist has been issued non-binary documents featuring a third gender option, a first for the country. The individual, identified as Alex Jürgen in a press release from Austrian rights group Lambda, received the documents on Tuesday (May 14). The 42-year-old had been fighting a legal battle to have their non-binary gender appropriately recognised in the official documents. Jürgen’s passport now features “X” as the gender marker, while their birth certificate uses the term “divers,” which can be roughly translated from German as “miscellaneous” or “other.” Third gender option recognised by Austria’s constitutional Court Austria’s Constitutional Court ruled in June that citizens have a right to have their gender identity accurately reflected in official documents, allowing for more than just the “male” or “female” options. For the birth certificate, the court declared the terms “inter,” “open” and “divers” to be acceptable, but Austrian Minister of Interior Herbert Kickl decided in December that civil registries should only use the term “divers” to identify a third gender option, which can only be recognised when the individual presents a certificate from a panel of doctors attesting to their intersexuality. Alex Jürgen’s passport now shows the third gender option “X.” (Supplied) Jürgen, who wishes to have the term “inter” on their birth certificate, will return to the courts to have this right enforced. “We are delighted at the historic issuance of the first documents certifying a third gender,” said Lambda president Dr. Helmut Graupner, who advised Jürgen during the legal battle. He also accused Kickl of ordering civil registry offices “to break the law” in limiting the choice of terminology in the documents. “We say thank you and heartfelt congratulations to our courageous role model and fellow activist!” — Tinou Ponzer The documents Jürgen received are nonetheless a historic first for Austria, and fellow intersex activists congratulated the campaigner on the achievement. “We say thank you and heartfelt congratulations to our courageous role model and fellow activist!” Tinou Ponzer, from the Association of Intersex People Austria (VIMÖ), said in a statement. Gabriele Rothuber, Intersex Representative of HOSI Salzburg, added: “We are very pleased for Alex Jürgen, who revolutionised Austrian vital records with his lawyer Dr. Graupner.” More: Alex Jurgen Austria Europe intersex rights non-binary third gender option Queer News. Straight Up. The LGBTQ+ stories you don’t want to miss, delivered to your inbox daily. Email address required Must be valid email Register By registering you agree to our Privacy Policy Thanks for registering! You can update your email subscriptions at any time in the My profile section of your account. Dec 01 2023 16 TV stars you grew up watching who later came out as LGBTQ+ Related articles Non-Binary Dec 16 2021 Non-binary people ‘are being erased’ by UK’s cruel refusal to issue gender-neutral passports TV Jun 22 2021 Emmy Awards to finally recognise non-binary performers with new gender-neutral option Trans Dec 21 2020 Canadian Métis federation votes for non-binary gender option on citizenship cards in ‘respect of basic human rights’ World Jul 19 2020 Austria issues first ever intersex birth certificate after four year battle for recognition US May 14 2020 Trump administration ordered to reconsider intersex non-binary Navy vet’s request for X gender passport Latest News Previous Next Celebrity Sep 25 Trans influencer calls out Nikki Glaser for stand-up joke about what’s ‘in her pants’ Culture Sep 25 Trans pro wrestling trailblazer Gisele Shaw signs exclusive NWA contract Bisexual Sep 25 The Traitors star Freddie Fraser’s mum’s emotional response to his coming out Celebrity Sep 25 Lili Reinhart says Hollywood ‘too afraid’ to greenlight lesbian vampire project Celebrity Sep 25 Carly Rae Jepsen describes moment Heated Rivalry inspired her son’s name Celebrity Sep 25 John Green ‘heartbroken’ for trans Harry Potter fans as he talks JK Rowling Current Affairs Sep 25 JD Vance claims James Talarico has a “weird obsession with children in drag” News Sep 25 Susan Sarandon, Hannah Einbinder and Caleb Hearon detained outside UN after protesting Netanyahu What to buy now Previous Next Fashion Mar 27 Connor Ives and MAC team up to re-release the iconic ‘Protect The Dolls’ t-shirt Music Mar 12 The Pussycat Dolls confirm reunion with new single and tour – how to get tickets Music Jan 23 A full guide to the 2026 Harry Styles Together, Together tour including dates and presale info Shopping Nov 24 2025 Ten truly awesome Christmas gifts you can buy to support queer-owned businesses Trans Sep 09 2025 Lush creates ‘luxurious’ trans flag bath bomb to support trans charities Tickets Jun 25 2025 Dolly Parton announces mini Las Vegas residency after wrapping her last tour almost a decade ago Shopping May 15 2025 LEGO celebrates late gay icon Keith Haring with new art set: ‘Want this so bad’ Music Apr 18 2025 Primavera Sound’s most iconic queer performances, from Troye Sivan to Ethel Cain Exclusive Previous Next Exclusive Sep 11 Ania Magliano talks SNL UK season two and anti-LGBTQ voices in comedy: ‘We do edgy in the right way’ Exclusive Sep 11 Elliot Tuttle on Blue Film’s personal inspiration, rejection and taboo: ‘It’s about loneliness’ Exclusive Sep 09 OF star Andy Lee on love for gay fans, ‘poisonous’ creators and ‘harmful’ stunts: ‘Gay men lift me up every day’ Exclusive Sep 07 Real Housewives of London spill the tea: ‘She’d go to the opening of a packet of crisps’ Opinion Sep 04 Katseye in London: A showcase of real talent deserving of the deafening screams Exclusive Sep 02 Adrian Chiarella and Joe Bird on tackling conversion therapy in gay horror Leviticus Exclusive Aug 21 Sziget Festival drag and circus troupe want audiences to feel like family Exclusive Aug 20 Gay wrestler Anthony Bowens says Heated Rivalry shows authentic life of closeted athletes Register to save articles and more. It'll only take a minute and it's free. JOIN US TODAY! Already have an account? Log in here "/> Download the PinkNews app Award winning LGBTQ+ journalism About us Editorial Policy Contact us Advertise Work for us Terms and conditions Privacy policy Privacy manager Privacy Manager