Martinique LGBTQI+ Resources – Rights in Exile Home About AsyLex Collaborative Approach AsyLex’s International Litigation – Best Practice Resources For Refugees Legal Assistance by Country Self-Help Kits Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Information by Country For Legal Advisors Legal Assistance by Country Country of Origin Information Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Information by Country Case Law Databases Special Issues International Legal Instruments related to Refugee Law International and Regional Human Rights Bodies and Courts RSD-Specific Resources Support AsyLex Our Partnership Model – Law Firms & Corporate Contact Us Donate Now Martinique LGBTQI+ Resources Home Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Information by Country Martinique LGBTQI+ Resources Martinique LGBTQI+ Resources On this page, you will find: Information on the legal framework concerning LGBTQI+ rights in Martinique Information on public attitude and state capacity to protect in Martinique Relevant case law A list of organisations supporting LGBTQI+ individuals in Martinique A list of Country of Origin experts in LGBTQI+ rights Legal Framework Same-sex sexual acts LGBTQI+ rights in Martinique include the ability for same-sex couples to marry, as well as provisions against discrimination in employment, housing, adoption, and other public spheres. The decriminalisation of same-sex sexual acts occurred in 1815, after a dual French-Martinique legal system was put in place. In the current legal system, Article 73 of the Constitution sets the conditions for the application of French laws in the territory. As such, the majority of legal protections against discrimination are recognised under French mainland legislation and automatically applicable to Martinique. For instance, discrimination based on one’s sexual orientation in the provision of goods and services has been explicitly recognised under French legislation since 2001, under Article 1 of Law No. 2001-1066 (2001) and amended Articles 225-1 and 225-2 of the French Penal Code . These amendments extend to the provision of goods such as education and healthcare, as well as against any discriminatory action including the refusal to hire and admonishment or dismissal based on one’s sexual orientation. In 2008, Article 122-45 was replaced by Article L1132-1 in the Labour Code , which established the principle of non-discrimination based on sexual orientation. Furthermore, in 2013, Law Opening Marriage to Same-Sex Couples not only legalized same-sex marriage in France and Martinique, but Article 1 also ensured that no employee was to be sanctioned, dismissed, or subject to discriminatory measures because of their sexual orientation. Transgender persons Discrimination in the provision of goods and services based on one’s gender identity was prohibited in France and its territories in 2012, when Article 4 of the Law on Sexual Harassment amended Articles 225-1 of the Penal Code (1994) to prohibit discrimination on the basis of sexual identity, including one’s orientation and gender identity. The former term, “sexual identity”, was replaced by the term “gender identity” in 2016, by the Law on the modernization of justice in the 21st century ( Law No. 2016-1547 ) (2016). The majority of amendments pursued on the basis of sexual orientation also included non-discrimination on the basis of gender identity. The aforementioned Articles 225-1 and 225-2 of the Penal Code (1994) extend to employment, education, housing, and other public benefits. For more detailed information on the protection of LGBTQI+ rights in Martinique, visit the Martinique ILGA World Database . Public attitudes and/or state's capacity to protect Homosexuality/Bisexuality There is little evidence to advise us on the public attitudes towards homosexuality and bisexuality in Martinique, however, as its legal protections and provisions are significant, there is a demonstrated level of safety experienced by LGBTQI+ individuals. Transgender persons Similarly, there is little evidence to proclaim the public attitude towards and state’s capacity to protect transgender persons, however, the recognition of non-binary gender and the right to change one’s legal gender indicates a level of accessibility to protections and recognition for Maritinque’s LGBTQI+ community. Case law We currently do not have any case law related to LGBTQI+ protections in Martinique, but we welcome suggestions. Organisations supporting LGBTQI+ individuals We are not currently aware of any organisations working with LGBTQI+ persons in Martinique, but we welcome suggestions. If you have any suggestions, please get in touch . Country of Origin experts in LGBTQI+ rights We do not currently have any specialists on LGBTQI+ issues in Martinique, but we welcome suggestions. If you have any suggestions, please contact us . Martinique Legal Assistance Find organisations providing legal assistance to refugees in Martinique. VISIT THE PAGE Martinique COI Find Martinique Country of Origin information (COI) experts, reports, commentaries, and relevant documents. VISIT THE PAGE We are always looking to expand the resources on our platform. If you know about relevant resources, or you are aware of organisations and/or individuals to include in our directories, please get in touch . Last updated June 2023 Previous page Next page Contact us rightsinexile@asylex.org Copyright 2024 © Asylex Global. All Rights Reserved. Design by SMART Privacy Policy