ASIA Insight
Industry
Market
Policy
World
Opinion
Entertainment
Visuals
AI PICK
search button
Sign In
search button
Korea's first transgender soldier laid to rest at national cemetery amid controversy
by Park Ung
Posted : June 25, 2024, 17:51 Updated : June 25, 2024, 17:56
Share
Share
facebook facebook
twitter twitter
URL URL
E-mail E-mail
-->
close
Print
Text size
Text size
A
A
A
A
close
The burial ceremony of Korea's first transgender soldier Byun Hee-soo is being held at the National Cemetery in Daejeon on June 24, 2024. Yonhap
SEOUL, June 25 (AJU PRESS) - Korea's first-ever transgender soldier was buried at the National Cemetery in Daejeon on Monday. Some 60 activists gathered to protest her burial there, arguing her service did not qualify her to be laid to rest in the cemetery.
Byun Hee-soo, who killed herself in 2021 after being forcibly discharged from the military, made headlines in Korea, a country known for its conservative stance on controversial LGBT issues.
Born male in 1998, Byun enlisted in the Army in 2017 and underwent general reassignment surgery in Thailand while on leave in 2019 after experiencing severe depression caused by gender dysphoria.
Despite Byun's plea to remain in the military, she was discharged in January 2020 because the loss of genitals is deemed a physical disability and gender dysphoria is classified as a mental disorder.
Byun then sought to overturn the decision through a string of court trials and administrative litigation, but she was suddenly found dead in her home in Cheongju, North Chungcheong Province in February 2021
In December 2022, the Army concluded her death was not considered to be in the line of duty, but her burial at the cemetery was finally approved after the National Human Rights Commission requested reconsideration.
Prior to the burial ceremony, protesters gathered at the Daejeon National Cemetery, claiming that her death was a personal matter. Joo Joseph, head of right-wing civic group People's Action for Freedom and Human Rights, said, "As far as I know, it is said that the eligibility requirements for burial at the National Cemetery is stringent. It's doubtful what she truly did for the country."
But the Center for Military Human Rights Korea expressed gratitude that the government approved her burial at the cemetery, emphasizing that Byun's desire, as someone who wished to live proudly as a soldier, was marred by the discriminatory discharge."
Copyright ⓒ Aju Press All rights reserved.
Related
Tens of thousands of people gather to celebrate gender equality at Seoul Queer Festival
Expelled transgender solider found dead at home ahead of reinstatement hearing
AJPlay
Visit our You Tube -->
Latest
Korea secures more Mexican crude, opens door to defense deals
Foreign visitors drive record crowds at Seoul palaces
Chuseok scenes change, but fight for Eumma jeon remains hot
Kim Jong-un invited to Russia: Russian deputy foreign min
Park Ji-hyun becomes first Korean actress nominated for International Emmy
Washington must not be pushed to Beijing's 'correct' stance on Taiwan: congressman
Lee regrets Kyiv breaking confidentiality over N. Korean POW transfer
Xi brings pandas, not business deals as Trump rolls out red carpet
Korea, Mexico seal investment pact overhaul, open oil supply-chain channel
K-beauty, BTS loom large over first Korean presidential visit to Mexico in 16 years
About
Copyright
Terms of Use
Privacy Statement
YouTube
Instagram
Addres: LEEMA Building, 11th floor, 42, Jong-ro 1-gil, Jongno-gu, Seoul
Tel: 82-2-767-1652
Mail: ajupress@ajunews.com
Copyright ⓒ AJU Press All rights reserved.
기사 이미지 확대 보기
닫기
-->
닫기