Transgender pupils: Guidance for schools removed from website Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Home News US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business World of Business Technology of Business NYSE Opening Bell Technology Artificial Intelligence Intelligence Revolution AI v the Mind Tech Now Health Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList To the Ends of the Earth Earth Science Natural Wonders Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcast Categories Radio Audio FAQs Video BBC Maestro Discover the World Live Live News Live Sport Site search Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters Guidance on support for trans pupils removed from website 8 September 2025 Share Save Add as preferred on Google Robbie Meredith BBC News NI education correspondent Getty Images The Supreme Court recently ruled that a woman is defined by biological sex under equalities law Guidance on supporting transgender pupils has been withdrawn from the website of Northern Ireland's Education Authority. The detailed guidance was first published in 2019 , but a recent Supreme Court ruling that a woman is defined by biological sex appears to have led to a review. The ruling has implications for the provision of single-sex spaces like changing rooms and toilets. Education Minister Paul Givan told the BBC that the guidance was produced in response to "the kind of activist campaigns that were being pursued by a minority" and that he did not believe it to be lawful. The Education Authority (EA) guidance, which was aimed mainly at post-primary schools, had recommended that reasonable efforts be made to allow transgender pupils to use changing rooms that match their gender identity. Givan said he wrote to the EA requesting its withdrawal. The minister said he had asked officials to consider the implications of the recent Supreme Court decision and to seek legal advice. "Having carefully considered the legal advice provided, I have concluded that the current Education Authority guidance does not reflect departmental policy and is inconsistent with the law in Northern Ireland," he said. "While many of these issues are best managed at a school level, consistent with the ethos of the school, the department has a responsibility to set clear, lawful, guiding principles." Speaking on BBC Radio Ulster's The Nolan Show , Givan said he was "providing absolute clarity on these issues" and this had "affirmed" his position. SDLP leader Claire Hanna and leader of the opposition Matthew O'Toole speaking at a press conference in Stormont SDLP leader Claire Hanna said that the education minister was showing "no empathy" to young people who are going into school "uncomfortable with themselves" and the "struggles and challenges" that they are facing. Speaking at a press conference at Stormont, Hanna added that "at all times in school the welfare and the mental wellbeing of young people has to be at the core of the things we are doing. "We'll be marking minister Givan against that". Alliance education spokesperson Michelle Guy said Givan's decision on the guidance had "created a vacuum that is not helpful for anyone". The Lagan Valley assembly member also described it as a "disgraceful distraction". "On a day in which we're pulling the education minister into the chamber to answer for his ongoing failure to ensure appropriate provision for SEN students , the timing of this announcement is a clear attempt to divert attention from such a crucial issue," she said. 'Create confusion' The Northern Ireland Teachers' Council (NITC) said Paul Givan's decision to remove the guidance "ignores the practical and pastoral needs of transgender and gender-questioning pupils". A spokesperson for the NITC also said the withdrawal of the guidance will "create confusion and leave schools without the necessary framework to support these pupils effectively". "We stand in solidarity with our trans colleagues and will fight to make sure that every workplace is one where difference is respected". EA Website The EA used to have an online hub with resources for how schools can support transgender pupils EA Website However, it has now been removed from the site The guidance advised teachers to be "sensitive to the needs of transgender pupils, as well as to the needs of other pupils" when making decisions about the use of toilets and changing rooms. "Where requested, staff should give a transgender pupil access to toilets which match their gender identity, unless there is good reason not to do so," the EA guidance had stated. The guidance had also said that teachers and school staff did not have "unlimited right to freedom of expression" regarding their views on transgender people. Teachers were advised that they should respect a transgender pupil's wishes with regard to what name they were called. Givan's decision on the guidance also comes just days after it was announced the author of the landmark Cass report - which carried out a review of gender identity services in England - is to review Northern Ireland's gender services . Health Minister Mike Nesbitt said Dr Hilary Cass had agreed to his request, and is expected to visit Northern Ireland with a team in November. NI gender services to be reviewed by Cass Equality Commission to seek clarity on court gender ruling The Supreme Court ruling gives clarity - but now comes the difficult part NI education Schools Northern Ireland LGBT Transgender people Related No unique student 'brain drain' in Northern Ireland 'School wasn't for me but further education suited me,' says student, as thousands of places cut Teacher unions to start action short of strike over workload pressures More from the BBC Just now Protesters blocking Garvaghy Road ahead of Orange Order march Orangemen are waiting in a hall at Drumcree Church, about a mile away from the protest, for the go-ahead from police to proceed. Just now 5 hrs ago Ghosts of Drumcree wakened as questions loom over Stormont's future We are again reminded of the unfinished business of that peace and of roads yet to travel, writes Brian Rowan. 5 hrs ago 7 hrs ago Orange Order march row goes to heart of ongoing divisions in Northern Ireland The dispute over the controversial parade is a reminder that the peace process is not over. 7 hrs ago 8 hrs ago Yellow rainfall warning for parts of Northern Ireland The Met Office yellow alert, which lasted until 14:00 BST, warned of intense rainfall before conditions improved. 8 hrs ago 9 hrs ago Theft of church Pride banner reported as hate crime The vicar of St Mark's Church in Sheffield says it is not the first time such items have been taken. 9 hrs ago British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages The BBC is in multiple languages Read the BBC In your own language BBC News Brasil BBC News Mundo (Spanish) BBC News မြန်မာ (Burmese) BBC News 中文 (Chinese) BBC News Indonesia BBC News 코리아 (Korean) BBC News ไทย (Thai) BBC News Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese) BBC News Azərbaycanca (Azeri) BBC News Magyarul (Hungarian) BBC News Кыргыз Кызматы (Kyrgyz) BBC News Polska (Polish) BBC News România (Romanian) BBC News Русская служба (Russian) BBC News na srpskom (Serbian) BBC News Україна (Ukrainian) BBC News O'zbek (Uzbek) BBC News عربي (Arabic) BBC News فارسی (Persian) BBC News Türkçe (Turkish) BBC News বাংলা (Bengali) BBC News دری (Dari) BBC News ગુજરાતી (Gujarati) BBC News हिन्दी (Hindi) BBC News मराठी (Marathi) BBC News नेपाली (Nepali) BBC News සිංහල (Sinhala) BBC News ਪੰਜਾਬੀ (Punjabi) BBC News Afaan Oromoo BBC News አማርኛ (Amharic) BBC News Afrique (French) BBC News Hausa BBC News Gaelic NAIDHEACHDAN BBC News Ìgbò BBC News Japanese 日本語 BBC News Gahuza BBC News Pidgin BBC News Somali BBC News Swahili BBC News தமிழ் (Tamil) BBC News తెలుగు (Telugu) BBC News ትግርኛ (Tigrinya) BBC News اردو (Urdu) BBC News Yorùbá BBC News World Service Follow BBC on: Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Do not share or sell my info Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us BBC.com Help & FAQs Content Index Set Preferred Source Copyright 2026 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.