Skip to main content
Social Media Links
Search
Header Navigation
News
Opinion
More topics
Politics
Sports
Entertainment
Education
Lifestyle
#NigeriaDecides
Main navigation
Videos
Photos
Documents
UK Warns LGBT+ Travellers To Nigeria Of Attacks, 14-Year Jail Term, Death Penalty Risks Under Sharia Law
August 19, 2026
News
The warning was contained in the latest travel advice issued by the UK Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO) on Nigeria.
The United Kingdom has warned LGBT+ travellers to Nigeria of the risk of arrest, violence, attacks, blackmail and intimidation, noting that same-sex sexual activity is illegal and can attract up to 14 years in prison.
The warning was contained in the latest travel advice issued by the UK Foreign, Commonwealth and Development Office (FCDO) on Nigeria.
The British government said LGBT+ travellers and people perceived to be members of the community could face heightened security and legal risks in the country.
“Same-sex sexual activity is illegal in Nigeria with penalties of up to 14 years in prison,” the FCDO stated.
It further warned that some northern states in Nigeria operate under Sharia law, under which same-sex sexual activity can attract the death penalty.
“Some northern states observe Sharia Law which can prescribe the death penalty for same-sex sexual activity,” the advisory said.
The FCDO also highlighted provisions of Nigeria’s Same Sex Marriage Prohibition Act, which it said provides for lengthy prison sentences for people involved in same-sex marriages.
According to the British government, the law extends beyond those entering same-sex marriages to people who help arrange or conduct such events, as well as those who attend events perceived to be same-sex weddings.
The law also criminalises activities involving gay groups and organisations, including helping to register or organise such groups or publicly promoting same-sex relationships, the FCDO said.
Warning Of Attacks, Blackmail
Beyond the legal restrictions, the UK government warned LGBT+ travellers of social hostility and the possibility of physical attacks and intimidation.
“Same-sex relationships are generally viewed as socially unacceptable in Nigerian society,” it stated.
The FCDO said this social hostility could expose people perceived to be members of the LGBT+ community, or those supporting LGBT+ rights, to increased risks.
“There is an increased risk of violence, attacks and threats, such as blackmail and intimidation against anyone being thought to be part of the LGBT+ community or supporting their rights,” the advisory warned.
Warning Over Network Shutdowns
The UK government also warned travellers that communications could be disrupted without notice, particularly during periods of unrest or when authorities impose restrictions.
“Network operators in Nigeria have in the past been ordered to suspend mobile networks and wi-fi with very little notice,” the FCDO said.
It also warned that Nigerian authorities could impose, amend or lift curfews and restrictions on vehicle movement at short notice.
“The authorities impose, amend and lift curfews and restrictions on the movement of vehicles at short notice throughout Nigeria,” it stated.
The FCDO warned that failure to comply with curfews and movement restrictions could expose travellers to arrest and detention.
“If you fail to observe curfews and restrictions, you could be at significant risk of arrest and detention,” it said.
Travellers were advised to obtain up-to-date information from local authorities or people with local knowledge.
UK Warns Of Protests, Communal Violence
The FCDO also cautioned British nationals about political rallies, protests and violent demonstrations, which it said could occur with little warning.
“Political rallies, protests and violent demonstrations can take place with little notice,” the advisory stated.
It urged travellers to avoid large gatherings and crowded public places and to move away from threatening situations rather than attempting to pass through them.
“If you see a threatening or intimidating situation, do not try to make your way through it. Turn around and move to safety,” the UK government said.
The FCDO said intercommunal violence occurred frequently and without warning in different parts of Nigeria.
“Although foreign nationals are not normally targeted, there is a risk you could be caught in an attack,” it stated.
The British government specifically mentioned Abuja and Lagos, saying widespread demonstrations periodically take place in the two major cities.
It said previous protests had resulted in disruption and violence, with security agencies having used tear gas, rubber bullets and live fire on some occasions.
“Exercise caution when travelling, limit travel after dark, avoid large crowds and gatherings, and monitor local media reporting, as well as UK Travel Advice,” the FCDO advised.
Warning Over Deadly Methanol In Alcohol
The UK government also warned British travellers about deaths and serious illnesses linked to alcoholic drinks containing methanol in Nigeria.
“There have been deaths and cases of serious illness caused by alcoholic drinks containing methanol in Nigeria,” the FCDO stated.
It said Nigerian authorities had attempted to shut down production centres following reported incidents, particularly those producing unlicensed traditional gin.
The UK government advised travellers to avoid unlicensed alcoholic products, warning that methanol could not be detected by taste or smell.
“Avoid drinking unlicensed products,” it said.
“Even small amounts of methanol can kill,” the FCDO warned.
“It is not possible to identify methanol in alcoholic drinks by taste or smell.”
It advised travellers who develop symptoms of methanol poisoning after consuming alcohol to seek urgent medical attention.
“Seek urgent medical attention if you or someone you are travelling with show the signs of methanol poisoning after drinking,” the advisory stated.
SaharaReporters.com is an outstanding, groundbreaking news website that encourages citizen journalists to report ongoing corruption and government malfeasance in Africa. Using photos, text, and video dynamically, the site informs and prompts concerned African citizens and activists globally to act, denouncing officially-sanctioned corruption, the material impoverishment of its citizenry, defilement of the environment, and the callous disregard of the democratic principles enshrined in the constitution.
Connect with us
Sahara Reporters
About
Support Us
Advertise
RSS Feeds
Submit A Story
Sections
News
Reports
Opinion
Politics
Business
Sports
Entertainment
Lifestyle
Education
Videos
Photos
Documents
Copyright
Copyright © 2006–2026 Sahara Reporters, Inc. All rights reserved. — Privacy Policy
Powered by Drutopia