National frameworks to address hate crime in Iceland | HCRW Skip to main content Search English Русский Main navigation Home About us ODIHR's mandate ODIHR's methodology Sitemap FAQs Hate Crime Report Racist and xenophobic hate crime Anti-Roma hate crime Anti-Semitic hate crime Anti-Muslim hate crime Anti-Christian hate crime Other hate crime based on religion or belief Gender-based hate crime Anti-LGBTI hate crime Disability hate crime ODIHR's Tools Civil Society Participating States Image Albania Image Andorra Image Armenia Image Austria Image Azerbaijan Image Belarus Image Belgium Image Bosnia and Herzegovina Image Bulgaria Image Canada Image Croatia Image Cyprus Image Czech Republic Image Denmark Image Estonia Image Finland Image France Image Georgia Image Germany Image Greece Image Holy See Image Hungary Image Iceland Image Ireland Image Italy Image Kazakhstan Image Kyrgyzstan Image Latvia Image Liechtenstein Image Lithuania Image Luxembourg Image Malta Image Moldova Image Monaco Image Mongolia Image Montenegro Image Netherlands Image North Macedonia Image Norway Image Poland Image Portugal Image Romania Image Russian Federation Image San Marino Image Serbia Image Slovakia Image Slovenia Image Spain Image Sweden Image Switzerland Image Tajikistan Image Türkiye Image Turkmenistan Image Ukraine Image United Kingdom Image United States of America Image Uzbekistan National frameworks to address hate crime in Iceland This page provides information on the national frameworks to address hate crime in Iceland. The information provided here should be viewed alongside data presented on Iceland's hate crime report page . Hate crime recording and data collection Iceland's data, collected by the National Police Commissioner, include cases of discrimination and defamation. There is no systematic collection of hate crime statistics in Iceland across the criminal justice system. Reported criminal offences are registered in a central police database (LÖKE). While hate speech is specifically covered by law, hate crime is only covered by a general provision of the criminal code that relates to the motive of the perpetrator. "Possible Hate Crimes" are registered in the police database as an addition to the registered offence based on the existence of a potential bias motive. The type of motive is also registered. Motives available for registration include: sexual orientation, gender identity, religion (other), religion (anti-Semitism), religion (anti-Christian), religion (anti-Muslim), racist - xenophobic bias and other. Hate crimes are not recorded by prosecutors or the judiciary, only hate speech. The National Commissioner of Police conducts victimization surveys; the 2021 survey included questions about possible bias motivation. The results of the 2021 survey are published here . Hate crime victim support Iceland provides specialized support for victims of hate crimes as part of its general victim support scheme. The Family Justice Center in Reykjavík – a one-stop-shop for adult victims of violence – offers counselling, legal advice and interpretation services free of charge. The Center works in co-operation with law enforcement, public and municipal administration, and civil society. The Center is attended by a police officer specialized in hate crimes. Women victims of hate crime can find shelter, while migrants can address the Icelandic Human Rights Centre – a specialized civil society organization. Hate crime capacity building In 2017, Iceland implemented ODIHR's Training Against Hate Crime for Law Enforcement ( TAHCLE ) and the Prosecutors and Hate Crimes Training ( PAHCT ) programmes. In May 2024, ODIHR conducted a refresher police training (TAHCLE) and a training for prosecutors (PAHCT). At the Center for Police Training and Professional Development (CPTPD) the following courses and training were held in 2024: Advanced Specialized CPTPD Programs; Criminal Investigation (10 ECTS): Includes a module on hate crimes and multiculturalism (target group: investigative officers); Leadership Training for Shift Supervisors (10 ECTS): Includes a module on hate crimes and multiculturalism; Diploma in Police Science – University of Akureyri. Mandatory course: Diversity and Policing (6 ECTS), covering hate crimes, hate speech, and multiculturalism; Hate and Extremism: Prevention and Response Course (one day course) led by trainers who completed ODIHR training in May 2024. Covers the impact of extremism, hate speech, and hate crimes on victims and communities, police response, and prevention strategies. Based on ODIHR’s TAHCLE material. The Centre for Police Training and Professional Development (CPTPD) has an agreement with Samtökin '78 (The National Queer Organization, of Iceland which advocated for +LGBTQIA rights) to provide training for police staff. This agreement, initially made in 2021 and renewed in 2024, ensures the educational representatives from Samtökin '78 regularly conduct training sessions for all police staff and students in police studies. Contact Us Email tndinfo@odihr.pl Tel +48 22 520 06 00 Fax +48 22 520 06 05 OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) Tolerance and Non-Discrimination Department Ul. Miodowa 10 00-251 Warsaw, Poland Footer ODIHR ODIHR contacts OSCE About OSCE websites Terms of service Log In Username Password Reset your password