Hate Crimes Against Gay and Lesbian
People in Gauteng: Prevalence, Consequences
and Contributing Factors

Research initiative of the Joint Working
Group conducted by OUT LGBT
Well-being in collaboration with the
UNISA Centre for Applied Psychology

This research was commissioned by the Joint Working Group (JWG)
and conducted by OUT LGBT Well-being in collaboration with the
UNISA Centre for Applied Psychology
Authors
Helen Wells
Louise Polders
Contact details of the members of the JWG
OUT LGBT Well-being
Postal: PO Box 26197, Arcadia, 0007
Tel: 012 - 344 5108
Email: research@out.org.za
Web: www.out.org.za
The UNISA Centre for Applied Psychology
Postal: PO Box 392, UNISA, 0003
Tel: 012 - 429 8544
Email: ucap@unisa.ac.za
Web: www.unisa.ac.za/dept/psy/centre
Behind the Mask
Tel: 011 - 403 5566
Web: www.mask.org.za
The Durban Lesbian and Gay Community and Health Centre
Tel: 031 - 301-2145
Web: www.gaycentre.org.za
The Equality Project
Tel: 011 487 3810/1/2
Forum for the Empowerment of Women (FEW)
Tel: 011 - 339 1867
Web: www.few.org.za
Gay and Lesbian Archives (GALA)
Tel: 011 - 717 4239
Web: www.gala.wits.ac.za
Triangle Project
Tel: 021 - 448 3812
Web: www.triangle.org.za

©All rights reserved. No part of this brochure may be reprinted or reproduced in any form
without permission from OUT LGBT Well-Being or another organisational member of the JWG.

HATE CRIMES AGAINST GAY AND LESBIAN PEOPLE IN GAUTENG:
PREVALENCE, CONSEQUENCES AND CONTRIBUTING FACTORS
Hate crimes against people belonging to minority groups are a global phenomenon that have negative
consequences for its victims. Hate crimes refer to:
Actions against a person based on their race, ethnicity, sexual orientation, religion or political
convictions or gender that intend to do harm or intimidate the person and may vary from verbal
abuse to murder.
In this brochure, the terms hate crime, bias-crime or victimisation will be used interchangeably.
Although all instances of victimisation have a negative impact, crimes based on sexual orientation
have a profound impact on both the victims and the group to which they belong (the gay and lesbian
1

community), causing fear and stigmatic stress including challenging the sense of self as a gay person .
2

A number of researchers have found the prevalence of bias-crimes against gay and lesbian people to
be high.
3

This report will look at the findings of a study conducted by OUT LGBT Well-being in collaboration
with the Joint Working Group4 in 2003/4, on levels of empowerment among gay and lesbian people
in Gauteng Province, South Africa. This study was the first representative quantitative study of this
magnitude (n= 487) to be conducted in South Africa. The study was extremely vast and looked at both
macro- and micro-issues. For the purposes of this brochure, the focus will be on victimisation of gay
5

and lesbian people in Gauteng.
Fear of Victimisation
6

• The figures from the OUT study reveal that fears of victimisation overall are higher for black than for
white respondents.
• Sexual abuse/rape, physical abuse and verbal abuse were the most feared.
• Domestic violence was feared more by black than white participants.

1

Herek, G.M., Gillis, J.R. & Cogan, J.C. (1999). Psychological Sequelae of Hate-Crime Victimization Among Lesbian, Gay, and
Bisexual Adults. Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology 67 (6), 945-951
Berrill, 1990; Cromstock, 1991; Finn & McNeil, 1987; Herek, 1989
3
LGBT – lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender
4
Formerly known as the “Gay and Lesbian Project Team”
5
In his brochure, the reference to gay and lesbian people includes a small percentage of bisexual and transgender people.
2

6

Black in this study refers only to black Africans and is not a generic term for all ‘non-whites’.

1

Prevalence Rates
Victimisation Experienced at School
• Victimisation on the basis of sexual orientation was widespread in schools.
• More males than females reported experiencing victimisation at school.
• With the exception of sexual abuse/rape, white males reported the highest rates of victimisation
(verbal and physical) experienced in schools.
• Similar prevalence rates were reported for sexual abuse/rape at schools for both males and
females.
• The main source of victimisation was pupils.
• Victimisation by teachers was more prevalent among black pupils.
• Victimisation by principals was low except in the case of black females.
Experiences of Victimisation in 2002/ 2003
Gay and Bisexual men (%)

Gay and Bisexual men (%)

Black

White

Black

White

Verbal abuse

39

33

36

40

Physical abuse

15

15

16

15

Sexual abuse

9

5

10

4

Dometic voilence

8

7

17

8

Attacks on property

16

16

12

15

• Except for domestic violence and sexual abuse/rape, victimisation is experienced at similar rates for
males and females.

Where and Why?
Locations of Hate Crimes
• Hate crimes occurred more frequently:
• For black people: in public spaces such as main roads, taxi ranks, bus stops, parks and
railway stations.
• For white people: in the workplace, victim’s home (highest for white males), pub/club
(highest for white females).

Reasons for Victimisation
• The perceived reasons for victimisation experienced by the respondents are given in the table below
in order of significance for each group.

2

Female
Black

Male
White

Black

White

Sexism

Homophobia

Homophobia

Homophobia

Homophobia

Sexism

Racism

Mugging/robbery

Racism

Religion

Mugging/robbery

Domestic issues

Religion

Mugging/robbery

Sexism

Religion

Domestic issues
(Please note: Sample size of white women is too small to ensure reliability.)
• Although mugging/robbery does not seem related to sexual orientation, victimisers may view gay
and lesbian people as ‘soft targets’ for crime because they often fail to report such incidents to the
police.

Consequences of Victimisation
Experience of anti-gay crimes can have a negative impact on well-being, with an increased risk for
thoughts of and attempts at suicide, as well as an increase in alcohol consumption as a means of
coping.
1. Well-Being and Suicide

2. Alcohol Use
• Fear of and experience of verbal abuse/harassment result in an increase in alcohol use7.

7

Note that this is for the sample as a whole. When looking at the different groupings, sexual abuse and domestic violence may
prove significant.

3

Factors affecting Victimisation
8

1. Levels of Outness

2. Time spent Socialising with other LGBT People
• Increased socialising with other LGBT people results in decreased experience of verbal abuse,
physical abuse, sexual abuse/rape, attacks on property/ possessions.
• Thus it seems that having a sense of community with other LGBT people protects one to some
extent from abuse.
3. Education
• Fear of and experiences of domestic violence as well as experiences of sexual abuse/rape decrease
as people become more educated, suggesting that the more educated people become, the more
empowered they are to take control of their lives.
The above data suggests a need for gay and lesbian organisations in South Africa to work together with
the Departments of Education and the South African Police Services to decrease and/or prevent hate
crimes against gay and lesbian people.

8

4

Outness refers to the level at which one openly discloses one’s sexual orientation.