EU celebrated IDAHO Day in Vientiane | EEAS Sorry, you need to enable JavaScript to visit this website. Skip to main content The Diplomatic Service of the European Union About us The European External Action Service (EEAS) is the European Union’s diplomatic service. Since 2011, the EEAS carries out the EU’s Common Foreign and Security Policy to promote peace, prosperity, security, and the interests of Europeans across the globe. About the European External Action Service See also Creation of the EEAS Annual reports Structure and Organisation High Representative / Vice President The EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs shapes the standing of the European Union on the global stage. The EU international roles All over the world, the European External Action Service, in coordination with the European Union institutions, addresses EU foreign policy priorities, including civilian and military planning and crisis response. See also Consular protection for EU citizens Diplomatic corps EU special representatives The European Union has Special Representatives in different countries and regions of the world. Get in touch Contact the European External Action Service, ask general questions on the European Union or get information on visiting the EEAS. See also Visit the EEAS EU in the World The EU maintains diplomatic relations with nearly all countries in the world and undertakes a range of actions with strategic partners, key international players, and emerging and developing powers. EU Diplomatic Representations The Diplomatic Representations play a vital role in representing the EU and its citizens around the globe and building networks and partnerships. Select Diplomatic Representation Select Diplomatic Representation Afghanistan Albania African Union Algeria Angola Argentina Armenia ASEAN Australia Azerbaijan Bangladesh Barbados, Eastern Caribbean States, OECS & CARICOM/CARIFORUM Belarus Benin Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Brazil Burkina Faso Burundi Cabo Verde Cambodia Cameroon Canada Central African Republic Chile China Colombia Congo (Brazzaville) Costa Rica Côte d'Ivoire Council of Europe Cuba Djibouti Dominican Republic DR Congo (Kinshasa) Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Fiji-Pacific Gabon, Sao Tomé-and-Principe and ECCAS Gambia Georgia Ghana Guatemala Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana, Suriname, & Aruba, Bonaire, Curacao, Saba, Saint Barthelemy, Sint Eustatius, Sint Maarten Haiti Honduras Hong Kong & Macao Iceland India & Bhutan Indonesia & Brunei Darussalam Iraq Israel Jamaica, Belize, Turks, Caicos Islands, Bahamas & Cayman Islands Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kosovo* Kuwait Kyrgyz Republic Lao PDR Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar and the Union of the Comoros Malawi Malaysia Mali Mauritania Mauritius, Mayotte & Seychelles Mexico Moldova Mongolia Montenegro Morocco Mozambique Myanmar (Burma) Namibia Nepal New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Pakistan Palestine (*) - Occupied Palestinian Territory, West Bank and Gaza Strip Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay OECD&UNESCO in Paris & Principalities of Andorra and Monaco Peru Philippines Qatar Russia Rwanda Saudi Arabia, Oman & Bahrain Senegal Serbia Sierra Leone Singapore Somalia South Africa South Korea South Sudan Sri Lanka & Maldives Sudan Switzerland and Liechtenstein Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Tanzania Tchad Thailand Timor-Leste Togo Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Türkiye Turkmenistan Uganda Ukraine United Nations & other international organisations - Geneva United Nations - New York United Nations organisations in Rome, Holy See, Sovereign Order of Malta, Republic of San Marino United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States of America Uruguay Uzbekistan Venezuela International Organisations in Vienna Vietnam World Trade Organization (WTO) Yemen Zambia and COMESA Zimbabwe Military & civilian missions & operations Since the first CSDP missions and operations were launched back in 2003, the EU has undertaken over 37 overseas operations, using civilian and military missions and operations in several countries in Europe, Africa and Asia. As of today, there are 20 ongoing EU CSDP missions and operations, including 11 civilian, eight military and one civilian and military initiative. Select mission & operation Select mission & operation EU NAVFOR Atalanta EUAM Iraq EUAM RCA EUAM Ukraine EUBAM Libya EUBAM Moldova and Ukraine EUBAM Rafah EUCAP Sahel Mali EUCAP Sahel Niger EUCAP Somalia EUFOR Althea EULEX Kosovo EUM Armenia EUMAM Mozambique EUMAM Ukraine EUMM Georgia EUMPM Niger EUNAVFOR ASPIDES EUNAVFOR MED operation IRINI EUPM Moldova EUPOL COPPS/Palestinian Territories EU SDI Gulf of Guinea EUTM Mozambique EUTM RCA EUTM Somalia EUPM Armenia Regions See also Africa Asia – Pacific Central Asia Eastern Europe Latin America & the Caribbean Middle East and North Africa (MENA) North America Overseas Countries and Territories (OCTs) Pacific Western Balkans Western Europe Regional policies See also Black Sea Synergy EU Arctic Policy Eastern Partnership EU Facilitated Dialogue: Belgrade-Pristina relations European Neighbourhood Policy Middle East Peace Process EU Indo-Pacific Strategy Election observation missions Election observation missions (EOMs) provide a comprehensive, independent and impartial assessment of an electoral process according to international standards for democratic elections. The EU is a worldwide recognised credible actor in international election observation. Since 2000, the EU has deployed over 160 EOMs in more than 60 countries. Selection Election Observation Missions Selection Election Observation Missions EOM Peru 2026 EOM Zambia 2026 EOM Bangladesh 2026 EOM São Tomé e Príncipe 2026 EOM Bolivia 2025 EOM Colombia 2026 EOM Malawi 2025 EOM Guyana 2025 EOM Ecuador 2025 EOM Maldives 2023 EOM Senegal 2024 EOM Zimbabwe 2023 EOM Jordan 2024 EOM Guatemala 2023 EOM Mozambique 2024 EOM Sri Lanka 2024 EOM Nigeria 2023 EOM Paraguay 2023 EOM Sierra Leone 2023 EOM Colombia 2022 EOM DR Congo 2023 EOM Kenya 2022 EOM Liberia 2023 EOM Lebanon 2022 EOM Lesotho 2022 EOM São Tomé e Príncipe 2022 EOM Timor Leste 2022 Iran & JCPOA Since 2006, the EU High Representative has led diplomatic efforts between the E3/EU+3 (China, France, Germany, Russia, the United Kingdom and the United States) and Iran, which led to the conclusion of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action on Iran’s nuclear program (JCPOA) in Vienna on 14 July 2015. The JCPOA is designed to ensure that Iran’s nuclear programme will be exclusively peaceful and provides for the comprehensive lifting of UN, EU and US nuclear-related sanctions. What we do All over the world, the EU works to prevent and resolve conflicts, to support resilient democracies, to promote human rights and sustainable development, to fight climate change, and to contribute to a rules-based global order. EU Peace, Security and Defence In an increasingly interconnected world, Europe’s security starts abroad. European citizens expect and deserve to live in a safe and stable environment. In the face of increased global instability, the EU needs to take more responsibility for its own security and increase its capacity to act autonomously. Crisis Response Crises can affect EU citizens, staff and interests outside of the EU. To protect them, the EU is strengthening its response to security and consular crises. The EEAS Crisis Response Centre contributes to this work. Human Rights & Democracy In a shifting geopolitical landscape, the EU has remained a strong defender of human rights. New geopolitical rivalries only serve to underline its role as a reliable and stable partner, and a champion of the rules-based international order. Equality Equality and non-discrimination are guiding principles of the European Union’s action on the international scene, as enshrined in the EU Treaties. Promoting gender equality, diversity and inclusion is a matter of human rights, but also of peace and security, social justice, and economic progress. EU green diplomacy The EEAS works in close collaboration with the European Commission and the EU Member States, and with the support of the EU Delegations, pursues climate, energy and environmental policy priorities through outreach and dialogue with partner countries, multilateralism and global action. This is known as EU Green Diplomacy. Multilateral relations In today’s world marked by major geopolitical and economic power shifts, multilateralism is still the most effective means to govern global relations in a way that benefits all. The EU stands committed to a renewed multilateralism fit for the 21st century. Migration, Mobility & Forced Displacement Migration is a global phenomenon presenting a unique set of challenges while offering substantial benefits to countries of origin and destination as well as migrants. The EU works to ensure that migration takes place in a safe, regular and sustainable manner. EU Enlargement & Neighbourhood The EU prioritises development and stability in the wider region and neighbourhood, working in close partnership with its neighbours to the East and South and supporting the reforms required by countries that want to become EU members. Humanitarian & Emergency response The European Union together with its Member States is the world’s leading humanitarian donor. New challenges, same principles , humanitarian aid is a key pillar of the EU’s external action and an important part of its ability to project its values globally. International cooperation & partnership The European Union, more than ever, needs to work closely with partners to face the global challenges and build together a safer, greener, more prosperous and equal world. Public Diplomacy Building bridges between the European Union and the rest of the world Cultural relations Cultural diversity is one of the emblems of the EU and its Member States and a tool to strengthen cultural relations beyond our borders, to connect people worldwide, to share values, to improve international relations and to learn from each other’s practice. Global Gateway The Global Gateway is a new European strategy to boost smart, clean and secure links in digital, energy and transport sectors and to strengthen health, education and research systems across the world. Digital Diplomacy Digital technologies have brought new opportunities into the lives of people around the world. They have also become key competitive parameters that can shift the balance of power. The goal of EU Digital Diplomacy is to secure the EU global role in the digital world, to protect its strategic interests and to promote its dynamic, human-centric regulatory framework for an inclusive digital transformation. Economic relations - Trade & sustainability In its trade relations, the EU promotes a sustainable growth model as defined by the European Green Deal and the European Digital Strategy, which can help the recovery from the COVID-19 economic crisis. EU Sanctions Restrictive measures, or sanctions, are one of the EU's tools to promote the objectives of the Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP). Tackling Disinformation, Foreign Information Manipulation & Interference Since 2015, the EU has significantly improved its capacity to tackle Foreign Information Manipulation and Interference (FIMI), protecting the EU’s democratic processes, security and citizens. International Days International days are key moments on the global calendar dedicated to celebrating, raising awareness and taking action on pressing issues that affect us all. From honouring human rights to championing environmental sustainability, these days unite organisations, communities, and individuals worldwide for change - one celebration, one cause, one action at a time. Newsroom & resources Press materials For media inquiries, please contact the EEAS press team Subscribe to our Press Alerts & Newsletters See also Press Releases Declarations / Statements Speeches / Remarks Op-eds Stories Read recent EEAS stories from around the world . Publications See also Factsheets Documents Reports Media gallery See also Videos Photos Campaigns Campaign pages are created around specific topic and actions. Audiovisual & Streaming See also Europe by Satellite Council of EU - Live Council of EU - Newsroom Europarl TV Other newsrooms See also EU Newsroom Other EU press release databases European Council Press Releases EU Press corner Document databases and Archives See also EEAS Archived Websites EEAS Public register Public register of Council documents EC Historical Archives INTPA documents library Opportunities Job opportunities, grants and tenders at the EEAS, EU Delegations and Missions and Operations. Vacancies Looking for an exciting job in the field of external relations, foreign affairs and security? Find our vacancies See also Contract Agents EU Delegation Programmes Traineeships CSDP missions Junior Professionals in Delegations (JPD) Programme EPSO Tenders Interested in one of the tenders? See how to apply for an EEAS call for tenders. See also How to apply for an EEAS call for tenders Useful links and documents for tenderers and contractors Ex-post publicity of the annual lists of contracts Official Journal of the European Union (TED) Auction sales Grants Grants can be awarded as donations to third parties that are engaged in external aid activities. Grants are managed by EuropeAid (DEVCO) or DG Near, the EEAS does not manage any grant. See also General information How to apply? Projects The EU supports projects worldwide covering a range of sectors. Events Every day, events are organised worldwide by the European Union Delegations and its partners. Language English Français Български Español Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Gaeilge Hrvatski Italiano Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Malti Nederlands Polski Português Română Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Русский Українська SEARCH Search From To Breadcrumb EEAS Search in the EEAS archive EU celebrated IDAHO Day in Vientiane THIS CONTENT HAS BEEN ARCHIVED PRINT EU celebrated IDAHO Day in Vientiane 18.05.2016 Teaser The European Union Delegation in Vientiane organised on 17th May 2016 at Europe House a reception to mark the International Day against Homophobia, Transphobia and Biphobia (IDAHO) for the second year in Laos. Text The event was attended by the EU Chargé d'Affaires Michel Goffin, diplomatic corps, civil society as well as local LGBTI (Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex) community, and the rainbow flag was flied on the Europe House building. The event is part of the activities organised by the EU around the world to highlight its continued and strong commitment to end discrimination and violence against LGBTI persons. "In many places discrimination and violence against Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender and Intersex persons is a daily occurrence. The EU repeats its call to all Governments around the world to abide by their international human rights commitments, to repudiate intolerance and to promote equality as enshrined in the Universal Declaration on Human Rights and other instruments," said Mr Goffin On this day, the EU also wishes to pay homage to the courageous advocacy efforts carried out by human rights defenders, activists, media journalists, and civil society organisations to address the violations faced by LGBTI persons. Their work has been crucial every step of the way in putting these issues on the table, documenting abuses and advocating for the effective protection of fundamental human rights, he added The International Day Against Homophobia, Transphobia and Biphobia is observed on May 17 th and aims to coordinate international events that raise awareness of LGBT rights violations and stimulate interest in LGBT rights work worldwide. Category Press releases Location Vientiane Editorial sections Lao PDR EEAS Back to top EUROPEAN UNION WEBSITES European Union | European Commission | European Parliament | European Council | All EU Institutions Contacts Data protection Privacy statements AI Disclaimer Cookie policy Europa analytics Language policy Legal notice Accessibility Login