Nation of Burkina Faso will start throwing gay people in jail - LGBTQ Nation Queerty : Culture Outsports : Sports GayCities : Travel LGBTQ Outpost : Shopping Login Become a Member Newsletter WhatsApp Facebook Instagram Twitter Threads Bluesky Menu Politics Good News Pride in Pictures Monthly Issue 🏳️‍🌈 100% LGBTQ+ Owned Politics Good News Pride in Pictures Monthly Issue Families Law & Policy Life Crime & Justice Arts & Media Commentary About Us Store Login Become a Member Part of the Q.Digital family of brands: Queerty GayCities INTO Outsports LGBTQ Outpost WhatsApp Facebook Instagram Twitter Threads Bluesky Law & Policy Nation of Burkina Faso will start throwing gay people in jail Burkina Faso never banned homosexuality before, but now it will be punished with years in prison. Alex Bollinger (He/Him) September 2, 2025, 10:30 am EDT Share: Interim President Ibrahim Traoré | RIA Novosti archive/via Wikipedia The West African nation of Burkina Faso’s ruling junta unanimously passed a law banning homosexuality yesterday. “The law provides for a prison sentence of between two and five years as well as fines,” said Justice Minister Edasso Rodrigue Bayala . “If a person is a perpetrator of homosexual or similar practices, all the bizarre behavior, they will go before the judge.” Related Ghana lawmakers introduce “cruel” anti-gay bill that also punishes LGBTQ+ activism He said that foreigners will be deported under the law. Burkina Faso has been under the rule of a military junta since September 2022, when former Interim President Paul-Henri Sandaogo Damiba – who himself came to power in a coup d’état several months earlier – was removed from his office. The civil unrest is a result of the government’s inability to contain an Islamist insurgency. Never Miss a Beat Subscribe to our newsletter to stay ahead of the latest LGBTQ+ political news and insights. Please enable JavaScript in your browser to complete this form. Please enable JavaScript in your browser to complete this form. Email * Frequency Email Frequency * Daily Brief Week in Review Week in Good News Sign Up The Muslim-majority nation had been among the 22 out of 54 African states where same-sex relations were not criminalized. The one-time French colony didn’t inherit anti-homosexuality laws found in many former British colonies. But the bill to ban homosexuality was supported by 71 unelected members of the transitional parliament yesterday as part of a wider set of family and citizenship law reforms “popularized through an awareness campaign,” officials said. The bill was initially approved by the military government’s leader, Captain Ibrahim Traoré, last year. Traoré has been shifting the country’s focus away from its close relationship with France and toward Russia. The law goes into effect immediately. Human rights groups have accused the government of cracking down on human rights with mass arrests and conscripting critics into the military. In late 2024, neighboring Mali also banned homosexuality. Two other African nations – Ghana and Uganda – increased the punishments for homosexuality in recent years. Subscribe to the LGBTQ Nation newsletter and be the first to know about the latest headlines shaping LGBTQ+ communities worldwide. A veteran online reporter, Alex Bollinger has been covering LGBTQ+ news since the Bush administration. He's now the editor-in-chief of LGBTQ Nation. He has a Masters in Economic Theory and Econometrics from the Paris School of Economics. He lives in Montpellier. Connect with Alex Bollinger: See more: Law & Policy , Decriminalization Related Trans man in Japan seeks legal recognition as father after providing egg for his child 100 orgs urge Aussie gov’t not to weaken trans protections: “It will create… more uncertainty & more harm.” Mother of Renee Good says she voted for Trump to fight “terrorists,” not “innocents” Help make LGBTQ Nation 1,500 Strong Independent LGBTQ+ journalism matters more than ever. This September, help us reach 1,500 members and keep LGBTQ+ stories, voices, and reporting available to millions of readers. $25 $50 $100 $150 Or give a different amount: $ $5/month $10/month $25/month $50/month $60/year $100/year $200/year $365/year We accept all major credit cards, Apple Pay, and Google Pay. 🏳️‍🌈 100% LGBTQ+ Owned ✔️ Always Free Journalism 🔒 Secure Payments ❌ Cancel Anytime Latest Law & Policy Blue-state hospitals are folding on trans youth care. Parents are wondering why they moved. In New York and other progressive states, providers are leaving transgender kids to fend for themselves. 4 minute read · 1790542800 Read Crime & Justice Trans woman & partner attacked by group of women driving by: “I want to know why.” The perpetrators pepper-sprayed the couple, and one yanked the trans woman by her hair. 2 minute read · 1790542800 Read Election News Texas Trump voters explain why they hate “morally corrupt” Ken Paxton: “People won’t vote for him” “Because [Republicans] picked him, they stand to lose the state.” 4 minute read · 1790535600 Read Commentary After 15 years in women’s prison, I realized I was a lesbian As I served a life sentence, I had given up on love. Then I met Paige. 10 minute read · 1790528400 Read Life Boebert’s not a lesbian, Republican warns about “furry pilots” & drag star speaks truth to power Here are the top stories of the week that you might have missed. 5 minute read · September 27, 2026 Read Life A lifetime on the margins & a manslaughter case full of questions Connor Schuyler fled anti-LGBTQ+ abuse as a child and survived homelessness, addiction and prison. Then he found himself in prison. 11 minute read · September 26, 2026 Read Life Hungarian gay couple trying to adopt for 5 years finally making headway under new government “We didn’t feel outright hostility, but when we first met social services it was clear they had an unspoken inclination.” 4 minute read · September 26, 2026 Read Commentary Don’t be fooled: The patriarchy is alive & fully functioning It’s so prevalent that it’s virtually invisible to some men and women alike. 8 minute read · September 26, 2026 Read Life “Legislation anxiety” is plaguing trans people nationwide There is “an environment of fear no matter where I go,” said one participant in a new study. 3 minute read · September 26, 2026 Read Life Anti-trans politician kicked out of public event after repeatedly misgendering his trans opponent PLUS: Dolly Parton’s encouraging advice and a drag king wants to be a castle’s witch! 3 minute read · September 26, 2026 Read Life Pete Hegseth is withholding pay from discharged trans soldiers. LGBTQ+ Dems are demanding answers. “This is unacceptable and appears to be another broken promise by this Administration.” 3 minute read · September 25, 2026 Read Politics “Disappointed and ashamed”: LGBTQ+ & ally groups slam Dem Rep. Marcy Kaptur’s anti-trans ads Democratic groups are urging her to change course. 5 minute read · September 25, 2026 Read Related See all Law & Policy Trans man in Japan seeks legal recognition as father after providing egg for his child Japan’s civil code hasn’t caught up to evolving families. 3 minute read · September 25, 2026 Read Law & Policy 100 orgs urge Aussie gov’t not to weaken trans protections: “It will create… more uncertainty & more harm.” The letter addresses a new push from anti-trans activists in response to a pro-trans ruling from an Australian court. 4 minute read · September 24, 2026 Read Law & Policy Mother of Renee Good says she voted for Trump to fight “terrorists,” not “innocents” “I am a registered Republican. I voted for President Trump under the impression that these agents were here to protect the citizens of the United States.” 2 minute read · September 23, 2026 Read Law & Policy Pride event organizers pledge to fight back after city denies permit: “We’re not going away.” “We are a resilient people who have always fought for our rights throughout history,” organizers wrote. 3 minute read · September 23, 2026 Read Law & Policy Rosie O’Donnell says Trump admin pressured ABC to block her interview of Epstein victims She eventually met with the women herself and made a powerful video about their plight. 3 minute read · September 22, 2026 Read Law & Policy Hate group sues school district for not notifying Christian dad about lessons on anti-bullying The father is angry because the lesson included discussions on how bias and bullying affect LGBTQ+ students. 3 minute read · September 21, 2026 Read Law & Policy Court rules trans women can be housed in men’s prisons & calls them men “who claim to be female” The three-judge panel of the 9th Circuit Court of Appeals consisted exclusively of Donald Trump appointees. 4 minute read · September 21, 2026 Read Law & Policy A gay man deported to a different country than his own has gone silent Pietro Graza was shackled for 36 hours and taken to a hotel where he and other deportees remain in legal limbo. 9 minute read · September 20, 2026 Read Law & Policy Notorious anti-trans activist melts down at school board meeting: “This is insane!” Beth Bourne, a local Moms for Liberty leader, called teachers “f**king idiots” and “brainwashed.” 4 minute read · September 18, 2026 Read Law & Policy EEOC agrees to let Christian employers misgender trans employees The Christian employers said Biden era workplace harassment rules violated their religious freedom. 3 minute read · September 18, 2026 Read Law & Policy Another over 100 people detained for protesting Turkey’s anti-LGBTQ+ arrests Without evidence, the Turkish government claims the crackdowns are about “keeping families safe.” 4 minute read · September 18, 2026 Read Law & Policy Parents say the state took their trans kid because they denied his gender. The truth is far darker. State Gov. Maura Healey (D) helped set the record straight. 5 minute read · September 17, 2026 Read More Stories We're Talking About Politics Trailblazing journo Kara Swisher sounds alarm on MAGA billionaire buying CNN: “F these guys! I don’t want to work for them” Kara Swisher does *not* want to work for David Ellison at CNN. September 27, 2026 · Queerty Politics Alyssa Edwards reads Ken Paxton for filth after disgusting attack: “Texas is big enough for all of us” Mess with Alyssa Edwards, you’re going to get the horns. September 25, 2026 · Queerty Politics Is Peter Thiel breaking up with JD Vance? All good things must come to an end. September 25, 2026 · Queerty Politics “F THOSE B*TCHES”: Why queer voters aren’t canceling Mary Peltola over her NYT exposé Looking at the accusations against Mary Peltola. September 24, 2026 · Queerty Politics Melania praises life under communism while plugging the sequel to her -$65M box office bomb Melania Tr*mp dropped by Fox & Friends this week to discuss her mysterious new female “empowerment” venture, promote her upcoming docuseries nobody asked for, and wax nostalgic about how delightful it was to grow up in Eastern Europe under authoritarian rule. September 24, 2026 · Queerty Politics GOP lawmaker has wild 20-minute meltdown on Senate floor over “furry pilots” & trans people He’s got bigger problems than furries in flight September 24, 2026 · Queerty Politics Now even Republicans want answers on Don Jr.’s Russian ties after wedding scandal Could Don Jr.’s scandal finally bring down the whole empire? September 23, 2026 · Queerty Politics She promised to carry on Lindsey Graham’s legacy. Now her campaign is imploding. Cue the off alarm bells for Republicans! 🚨 🚨 🚨 This could be the Senate flip nobody saw coming! September 23, 2026 · Queerty Politics Influencer says he posed as a gay escort at RNC & takes us on a wild ride Nick Pringle knew that posing as a male escort at the RNC would be a dangerous assignment… September 23, 2026 · Queerty Politics State-run “Tr*mp TV” is already a disaster of humiliating proportions Well that was a flop! September 22, 2026 · Queerty Politics From hookup app to Capitol Hill: Why Grindr is hosting members of Congress Grindr played host to a surprising visitor. September 22, 2026 · Queerty Politics Somehow Don Jr.’s Russian wedding scandal just got 10 times worse He just keeps getting in deeper September 22, 2026 · Queerty Newsletter WhatsApp Facebook Instagram Twitter Threads Bluesky About Us Contact Us Privacy Policy AI Policy Terms of Service Privacy Notice for California Residents Monthly Issue © 2010 - 2026 LGBTQ Nation® | Proudly LGBTQ+ Owned and Operated 🏳️‍🌈 🏳️‍⚧️ LGBTQ Nation is a registered trademark of Q.Digital, Inc., registered in the state of California. $5/month $10/month $25/month $50/month $60/year $100/year $200/year $365/year We accept all major credit cards, Apple Pay, and Google Pay. 🏳️‍🌈 100% LGBTQ+ Owned ✔️ Always Free Journalism 🔒 Secure Payments ❌ Cancel Anytime