Policy 713
SEXUAL ORIENTATION AND GENDER IDENTITY

D EP AR TME NT OF EDU CA TI ON A ND E ARL Y CHILD HOO D DEV EL OPME NT
Effective: August 17, 2020
Revised: July 1, 2023; August 23, 2023, January 1, 2025

1. Purpose
This policy sets minimum requirements for school districts and public schools to create a safe, welcoming,
inclusive, and affirming school environment for all students, families, and allies who identify or are perceived
as 2SLGBTQIA+.

2. Application
This policy applies to the school environment, which includes:
a) all students who are registered in public schools in New Brunswick;
b) all school personnel, contract/casual employees, visiting professionals, student teachers, parents,
volunteers, and visitors,
c)

school transportation: on school buses or other school system-organized transportation;

d) school districts and school sponsored and endorsed events and activities;
e) all school documents, classroom instruction, forms, report cards, classroom materials, and
evaluations/tests; and
f)

all communications related to a school district or a school (e.g. meetings, phone calls, written
correspondence, emails, social media messaging, and other instances that could have an impact on
the school environment).

3. Definitions
2SLGBTQIA+ refers to the commonly used acronym that represents different identities within society. The
acronym refers to an individual who identifies as: Two-Spirit, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer,
intersex, and asexual. The acronym ends with a plus symbol to reflect that in society there are many more
identities that could be represented.

P OL ICY 713 : S E XUAL O RIE NTA TI ON AND G END ER I DEN TI TY

1

2SLGBTQIA+ Ally refers to an individual who acknowledges that 2SLGBTQIA+ people face discrimination and
advocates for social justice.
Approved Professional refers to a social worker or a member of a profession that has established standards
of practice or guidelines to assess the student’s capacity.
Capacity refers to the ability of the student to understand the nature and impact of a decision, considering
their age, development, maturity, and the gravity of the decision, and the student’s ability to make and
communicate that decision with appropriate seriousness and reflection.
Cisgender refers to an individual whose gender identity corresponds with their sex assigned at birth.
Chosen first name refers to a name that has been identified by a student to be used in place of their legal
first name.
Chosen pronoun refers to a pronoun that has been identified by a student that aligns with their gender
identity.
Formal use refers to the chosen first name and/or pronoun(s) that has been identified by a student to be
used for official record-keeping purposes and daily management (EECD, school district, school software
applications, report cards, etc.)
Gender Expression refers to how a person publicly expresses or presents their gender in the context of
societal norms. Others perceive a person’s gender through these attributes, which may include behaviour,
outward appearance, body language, voice, chosen name and/or pronoun(s).
Gender Identity refers to an individual’s internal and individual sense of their gender and may or may not
align with societal expectations based on assigned sex at birth. A person’s gender is not always fixed, can
change over time, and is not related to sexual orientation.
Homophobia/transphobia refers to negative attitudes, feelings, discrimination, and behaviours towards
individuals who identify or are perceived to be a member of the 2SLGBTQIA+ community.
Inclusive language refers to affirming and neutral expressions, and does not distinguish by gender (e.g.
student, sibling, parent, guardian, caregiver, teacher, etc.).
Informal use refers to the chosen first name and/or pronoun(s) that has been identified by a student to be
used in social interactions outside or inside the classroom and may include a class list.
Legal name refers to the name that appears on a birth certificate. The legal name will appear on high school
diplomas and official transcripts.
Members of the school environment refer to all students who are registered in the public school system in
New Brunswick, school personnel, contract and casual employees, visiting professionals, student teachers,
parents, visitors, and volunteers.

P OL ICY 713 : S E XUAL O RIE NTA TI ON AND G END ER I DEN TI TY

2

Non-binary gender refers to a gender identity that is neither exclusively girl/woman or boy/man. This
encompasses a range of gender experiences.
Parents refer to parents or guardians, as defined in the Education Act.
Sexual orientation refers to an individual’s psychological, emotional and/or sexual attraction towards
another person.
Student(s) refer to pupils, as defined in the Education Act.
School Personnel as defined in the Education Act. for the purpose of this policy, school personnel also includes
volunteers.
Transgender refers to an individual who does not identify either fully or in part with the gender associated
with their sex assigned at birth.

4. Legal Considerations and Authority
E DU CA TIO N A CT , SE CTI ON 6
The Minister…
(b.2) may establish, within the scope of this Act, provincial policies and guidelines related to
public education, …
E DU CA TIO N A CT
Subsection 13(1)(e) and 13(3), Roles of parents
Subsection 27(1), Duties of Teachers
Paragraphs 28(2)(c),28(2)(e) and 28(2)(h), Duties of Principals
Paragraphs 33(1.1), Duties of Parent School Support Committees
Paragraphs 36.9(5)(a) and (b), Duties of the District Education Council
Subsection 48(2)(b), Duties of Superintendent

5. Goals/Principles
The Department of Education and Early Childhood Development (EECD) believes:

5.1.
All members of the school environment have the right to self-identify and express themselves without fear of
consequences and with an expectation of dignity, privacy, and confidentiality.

5.2.
All members of the school environment have the right to learn and work together in an atmosphere that is
respectful and free from harassment and discrimination.

P OL ICY 713 : S E XUAL O RIE NTA TI ON AND G END ER I DEN TI TY

3

5.3.
Having family involvement and support in a student’s education and life is beneficial for their development
and well-being. Involving families as much as possible is the goal of the public-education system.

5.4.
It is important that all students have a sense of belonging and connection to their school environment.
Students should feel that they are supported by school personnel.

5.5.
School personnel will create a culture whereby 2SLGBTQIA+ students see themselves and their lives positively
reflected in the school environment.

5.6.
It is important to collaborate with community stakeholders to support the needs of all 2SLGBTQIA+ members
of the school environment.

5.7.
Support groups such as Gender and Sexuality Alliances (GSA) are important and provide a safe space for
students. Gender and Sexuality Alliance and school personnel will work together to create a safe and inclusive
school environment for 2SLGBTQIA+ students.

6. Requirements/Standards
6.1.

SUPPORTIVE SCHOOL ENVIRONMENT

6.1.1. The school principal will ensure that all members of the school environment are aware of the
requirements set out in this policy.
6.1.2. School personnel will ensure that the school environment respects students’ right to self-identify, and
appropriate measures are in place to protect personal information and privacy.
6.1.3. School personnel will ensure that students legal name on official records are used only for the purpose
for which it has been collected and is not disclosed without student’s informed consent.
6.1.4. When applicable, the school principal or a designated member of the school environment will ensure
that a 2SLGBTQIA+ student has a support plan based on their individualized needs.
6.1.5. EECD and school districts will provide professional learning opportunities to school personnel to
understand and support the needs of 2SLGBTQIA+ students.

P OL ICY 713 : S E XUAL O RIE NTA TI ON AND G END ER I DEN TI TY

4

6.1.6. Homophobic/transphobic language, behaviour, or discrimination towards a member of the school
environment will not be tolerated and will be immediately reported to the principal. All allegations will
be taken seriously and dealt with in a timely and effective manner as per Policy 703 – Positive Learning
and Working Environment.
6.1.7. All students will be able to participate in curricular, co-curricular, and extracurricular activities that are
safe, welcoming, and consistent with their gender identity.
6.1.8. EECD, school districts, and school personnel will ensure that classroom materials and activities contain
positive, age-appropriate, and accurate information related to sexual orientation and gender
identities.
6.1.9. EECD, school districts, and schools will strive to use inclusive language when communicating with
members of the school environment. This includes classroom instruction, classroom materials, school
and school district newsletters, forms, social media, emails, phone calls, and meetings.

6.2. SUPPORTIVE ALLIANCES
6.2.1. All schools will have a designated member of the school environment to act as an advocate and a
resource for students who identify as 2SLGBTQIA+ and their families.
6.2.2. The school principal and school personnel will support the establishment of a Gender Sexuality
Alliance and will support any events and activities organized by the group.
6.2.3. Gender Sexuality Alliance membership does not require parental consent and privacy and
confidentiality will be respected.

6.3. SELF IDENTIFICATION
6.3.1. All students have the right and presumed capacity to self-identify and communicate their chosen first
name and/or pronoun(s). Members of the school environment will use the chosen first name and/or
pronoun(s) consistently.
6.3.2. The expectation is that families are fully involved and aware. When a student is uncomfortable
providing informed consent, the school will respect the student’s wishes and work with them to create
a support plan to make their parent(s) aware when they are ready.
6.3.3. Students 16 years of age and older may communicate how their chosen first name and/or pronoun(s)
will be formally and/or informally used in the school environment. Parental awareness is encouraged
but not required.
6.3.4. Students under 16 years of age may communicate how their chosen first name and/or pronoun(s) will
be formally and/or informally used in the school environment. Parental awareness is encouraged for
informal use but not required. Parental consent is required for formal use.

P OL ICY 713 : S E XUAL O RIE NTA TI ON AND G END ER I DEN TI TY

5

6.3.5. In rare cases where the principal or school personnel have concerns that a student does not have the
capacity and whose parent are not aware, an approved professional may assess the student’s capacity.
The student has the right to request an assessment and it must be done in a reasonable timeframe.

6.4. UNIVERSAL SPACES
6.4.1. All students will have access to washroom facilities that align with their gender identity. The washroom
facilities will be available to all students in a non-stigmatizing manner.
6.4.2. All schools will have at least one universal washroom facility (private) that is safe and accessible at all
times.
6.4.3. All students will have access to changing areas (private) that align with their gender identity. The
changing areas will be available to all students in a non-stigmatizing manner. These facilities will be
safe and accessible at all times.

7. Guidelines/Recommendations
7.1.
Where possible, schools are encouraged to provide more than one universal washroom facility that is
accessible at all times.

7.2.
Superintendents will make reasonable efforts to support students who request to transfer schools due to
reasons relating to their sexual orientation, gender identity, and gender expression.

7.3.
Where possible, student should have access to accommodations that align with their gender identity when
travelling off school property. School personnel will use best efforts to accommodate all students on field
trips, co-curricular and curricular activities, travelling for competition, or events at another school, etc.

8. District Education Council (DEC) Policy Making
A District Education Council may develop policies and procedures that are consistent with, or more
comprehensive than, this provincial policy. Their policy must be posted on the school district website and
shared with all members of the school environment at the beginning of every school year.

P OL ICY 713 : S E XUAL O RIE NTA TI ON AND G END ER I DEN TI TY

6

9. References
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedom
Human Rights Act
Education Act
Right to Information and Protection of Privacy Act
Policy 703 – Positive Learning and Working Environment
New Brunswick LGBTQ Inclusive Education Resource

10. Contacts for Additional Information
Department of Education and Early Childhood Development
Policy and Legislative Affairs
506 453-3090 edcommunication@gnb.ca
Department of Education and Early Childhood Development,
Education and Support Services Branch (Anglophone Sector) 506 453-2816

Original signed by
Minister

P OL ICY 713 : S E XUAL O RIE NTA TI ON AND G END ER I DEN TI TY

7