Syria | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Syria At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? No Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? No Legal Gender Recognition Possible? No LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? No Last Update: March 12, 2026 Syria’s legal landscape remains highly restrictive for LGBTIQ individuals, with “sexual acts against nature” and public indecency being criminalized under Articles 520 and 517 of the penal code. Syrian law does not provide a path for legal gender recognition, nor does it prohibit nonconsensual medical interventions on intersex youth. From the outbreak of the Syrian revolution in March 2011 to December 2024, Syria was embroiled in an armed conflict, which pitted the government and various armed groups against each other. During this period, violence on the grounds of sexual orientation and gender identity escalated . Islamist groups that applied a strict interpretation of Shariah executed and publicly tortured sexual and gender minorities, particularly targeting queer men and trans women. Government forces arrested sexual and gender minorities on morality-related charges, committed enforced disappearances, and perpetrated acts of sexual violence in detention centers, checkpoints, jails, and within the army. Due to societal stigma, these forms of violence are often underreported, and survivors’ severe mental and physical health trauma is compounded by a lack of adequate access to care and justice . In regions controlled by opposition Syrian Democratic Forces (SDF) and Kurdish forces, the situation for sexual and gender minorities was marginally better , but still fraught with legal and social challenges. While Kurdish forces have sometimes shown a degree of tolerance for sexual and gender diversity, they do not legally recognize same-sex relationships or transgender people’s gender identities, and people of queer experience still face severe social stigma in regions they control. In December 2024, the regime fell at the hands of opposition forces, ending five decades of Assad family rule. This was celebrated by some people of queer experience in Syria, with the Guardians for Equality Movement, a Syrian LGBTQIA+ organization, calling the Assad dictatorship “one of the greatest sources of violence and terror” and expressing hope that regime change would improve access to safety and rights. However, in early 2025, queer activists reported a renewed crackdown , including arrests, raids, public shaming, and violence. Trans people were specifically targeted , with reports of assault and arbitrary arrests by authorities and civilians engaging in mob attacks . In a context of state-sponsored violence and radical anti-gender persecution by opposition groups, families and communities have been a source of hate and violence against people of queer experience, further entrenching queerphobia, with lesbian persons in particular reporting cases of effective house arrest by their families. LGBTIQ groups operate underground or from outside the country, and persecuted individuals in Syria cannot easily turn to organizations for protection or support. Many have been forced to flee the country as refugees, seeking asylum in neighboring countries like Turkey, Lebanon, and Jordan, where they still face significant risks of discrimination and marginalization. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International