Caymans define marriage amid fears UK will impose civil partnerships | PinkNews About Us Advertise Work with us Login Register Latest News View all UK US World Health Politics Sport Business Culture View all TV Film Celebrity Drag Theatre Music Gaming Lifestyle View all Beauty Careers Fashion Relationships Travel Shopping View all Deals Recommended Fashion & Beauty Tickets Video View all News & Politics Entertainment Lifestyle Discover Trans Awareness Week Drag Race Explainers The Queer Agenda Toggle menu Account Register Login Community Caymans define marriage amid fears UK will impose civil partnerships Sep 10 2008 Written by Tony Grew Share Save for later Comment An amendment to legislation in the Cayman Islands defining marriage as between a man and a woman was approved by the territory’s Legislative Assembly on Monday. However, the proposed change to the law but does not mention civil partnerships. Recent UK government regulations allow the partners of citizens of British Overseas Territories that have passed civil partnership legislation to apply for citizenship. However, the UK has not extended partnership legislation across the 14 territories, which include Gibraltar, the Falkland Islands and the Cayman Islands, and none of them have moved to legalise same-sex partnerships. Cayman opposition parties want the law extended to ban civil partnerships as they fear the UK or EU may impose them at some point in the future. “If we were to define civil unions it would mean we would condone them, and accept them and allow them, and I’m saying otherwise,” Leader of Government Business Kurt Tibbetts told the Caymanian Compass last month. “Cayman does not recognise the existence of civil partnerships,” said the paper. “The only place the words “civil partnership” appear in Cayman Islands law is within a set of regulations, which govern British passports and British nationality within overseas territories.” The UK and the Caymans are due to begin talks about constitutional reform later this month. Homosexual acts between consenting adults were decriminalised in the Caymans by a UK Order in Council in December 2000. In the wake of an incident in which a gay man was detained by police on the Cayman Islands after kissing his boyfriend in public, there has been much discussion of gay rights in the territory. The Director of Tourism apologised to Aaron Chandler, an American visitor who was targeted and held by police in May for kissing his boyfriend. Mr Chandler said that the apology was appreciated but also made sense from a business point of view 70% of the Caribbean nation’s GDP comes from tourism. The 23 year old American, on holiday with his partner, was detained by an off duty police officer and taken to a police station but not arrested. He was later released without charge. Complaints about the couple kissing were reportedly made by fellow customers at the Royal Palms resort. They deny that they behaved any differently from other straight guests. Mr Chandler was told by the off duty police officer to not kiss his partner in public. The couple decided to ignore the instruction and when later in the evening they kissed again Mr Chandler was physically taken away from the nightclub where they were drinking with friends and detained at the local station. More: Americas Queer News. Straight Up. The LGBTQ+ stories you don’t want to miss, delivered to your inbox daily. Email address required Must be valid email Register By registering you agree to our Privacy Policy Thanks for registering! You can update your email subscriptions at any time in the My profile section of your account. Nov 29 2023 56 celebrities you didn’t know are gay, bisexual or lesbian Related articles World Jul 09 2025 All 65 countries where it’s illegal to be LGBTQ+ in 2025, including the UAE and Mali History Mar 24 2024 The long, fascinating, hard-fought history of the journey to marriage equality in the UK Features Dec 25 2023 The seven most inspiring LGBTQ+ images that defined 2023 News Feb 11 2023 Stonewall boss and wife told they can’t convert civil partnership to marriage Law Dec 23 2022 British Virgin Islands to hold same-sex marriage referendum after gay couple launch legal challenge Latest News Previous Next Celebrity Sep 25 Trans influencer calls out Nikki Glaser for stand-up joke about what’s ‘in her pants’ Culture Sep 25 Trans pro wrestling trailblazer Gisele Shaw signs exclusive NWA contract Bisexual Sep 25 The Traitors star Freddie Fraser’s mum’s emotional response to his coming out Celebrity Sep 25 Lili Reinhart says Hollywood ‘too afraid’ to greenlight lesbian vampire project Celebrity Sep 25 Carly Rae Jepsen describes moment Heated Rivalry inspired her son’s name Celebrity Sep 25 John Green ‘heartbroken’ for trans Harry Potter fans as he talks JK Rowling Current Affairs Sep 25 JD Vance claims James Talarico has a “weird obsession with children in drag” News Sep 25 Susan Sarandon, Hannah Einbinder and Caleb Hearon detained outside UN after protesting Netanyahu What to buy now Previous Next Fashion Mar 27 Connor Ives and MAC team up to re-release the iconic ‘Protect The Dolls’ t-shirt Music Mar 12 The Pussycat Dolls confirm reunion with new single and tour – how to get tickets Music Jan 23 A full guide to the 2026 Harry Styles Together, Together tour including dates and presale info Shopping Nov 24 2025 Ten truly awesome Christmas gifts you can buy to support queer-owned businesses Trans Sep 09 2025 Lush creates ‘luxurious’ trans flag bath bomb to support trans charities Tickets Jun 25 2025 Dolly Parton announces mini Las Vegas residency after wrapping her last tour almost a decade ago Shopping May 15 2025 LEGO celebrates late gay icon Keith Haring with new art set: ‘Want this so bad’ Music Apr 18 2025 Primavera Sound’s most iconic queer performances, from Troye Sivan to Ethel Cain Exclusive Previous Next Exclusive Sep 11 Ania Magliano talks SNL UK season two and anti-LGBTQ voices in comedy: ‘We do edgy in the right way’ Exclusive Sep 11 Elliot Tuttle on Blue Film’s personal inspiration, rejection and taboo: ‘It’s about loneliness’ Exclusive Sep 09 OF star Andy Lee on love for gay fans, ‘poisonous’ creators and ‘harmful’ stunts: ‘Gay men lift me up every day’ Exclusive Sep 07 Real Housewives of London spill the tea: ‘She’d go to the opening of a packet of crisps’ Opinion Sep 04 Katseye in London: A showcase of real talent deserving of the deafening screams Exclusive Sep 02 Adrian Chiarella and Joe Bird on tackling conversion therapy in gay horror Leviticus Exclusive Aug 21 Sziget Festival drag and circus troupe want audiences to feel like family Exclusive Aug 20 Gay wrestler Anthony Bowens says Heated Rivalry shows authentic life of closeted athletes Register to save articles and more. It'll only take a minute and it's free. JOIN US TODAY! Already have an account? Log in here "/> Download the PinkNews app Award winning LGBTQ+ journalism About us Editorial Policy Contact us Advertise Work for us Terms and conditions Privacy policy Privacy manager Privacy Manager