Morocco | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Morocco At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? No Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? No Legal Gender Recognition Possible? No LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? No Last Update: March 12, 2026 Morocco criminalizes same-sex relations under Article 489 of the penal code, which prohibits “indecent acts” between persons of the same sex. The law specifically targets same-sex intimacy, with penalties ranging from six months to three years in prison. It gives police a wide degree of discretion in enforcement, often leading to arbitrary arrests. According to the Office of the General Prosecutor, 17,721 adults were prosecuted for engaging in non-transactional sexual relations outside of marriage in 2018, including 170 who were charged with same-sex relations. Human Rights Watch reported on a “campaign of online harassment of presumed gay and bisexual men” in 2020. There have been no recorded instances of legal gender recognition for transgender individuals, and changing gender markers on official documents is not permitted . Those who publicly identify as LGBTIQ face significant risks of violence and harassment. Moroccan authorities consistently block attempts to register or operate civil society organizations that work on the rights of sexual and gender minorities. One notable example is KifKif, the first LGBTIQ advocacy group founded in Morocco in 2004. KifKif faced repeated refusals from the government when attempting to register officially, hindering its ability to legally operate within the country. Consequently, in 2008, KifKif relocated its operations to Spain while continuing to support LGBTIQ communities in Morocco. Another example is Association Akaliyat, a community organization advocating for LGBTI people’s rights. It has been striving for official recognition since its initial application in December 2016. However, despite its persistent efforts, Moroccan authorities have consistently denied the group registration, effectively preventing it from functioning legally within the country. While there are no public LGBTIQ organizations operating within Morocco due to legal restrictions, advocacy continues to take place inside and outside of the country. Various Moroccan LGBTIQ individuals, groups, and allies engage in underground movements and diaspora activism. In late 2025, a decentralized collective known as GenZ 212 mobilized thousands of young Moroccans to participate in a wave of public demonstrations across numerous cities, demanding improvements in public services and more responsive governance. Although LGBTIQ issues were not among the movement’s demands, one participant reported seeing “a lot of feminists and queer activists in the streets.” However, she also noted that they faced targeted backlash: “police accessed their phones and used the content to criminalize them.” Morocco initiated a reform process of the Family Code (Moudawana), proposing changes related to marriage, divorce, child custody, and recognition of women’s domestic contributions. While some amendments strengthen protections for women, some civil society actors argued that the reforms fall short of addressing structural gender inequalities, particularly regarding inheritance and full legal equality. The reforms remain rooted in a cisheteronormative and gender-binary model of the family, and there are no proposed changes that would recognize same-sex relationships, diverse family forms, or gender identity. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International