Kyrgyzstan | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Kyrgyzstan At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Legal Gender Recognition Possible? No LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? No Last Update: March 12, 2026 In Kyrgyzstan, consensual same-sex sexual activity was decriminalized in 1998, aligning the age of consent for both different-sex and same-sex sexual acts at 16. Despite this legal progress, the country still does not recognize same-sex marriages or civil unions, and a 2016 constitutional amendment explicitly bans same-sex marriage. A provision that had, in some cases, allowed transgender people to change their legal gender markers was removed in a 2020 amendment to the Law on Civil Status . In early 2026, a member of parliament proposed a draft bill that goes further by defining sex as immutable, explicitly banning legal gender recognition, and prohibiting “any actions” with regard to minors “aimed at changing their gender identity or forming ideas about the possibility of changing the sex recorded at birth, including medical, surgical, and psychological interventions for this purpose.” The new proposal follows two discriminatory laws adopted in 2023 and 2024 that silence speech on sexual and gender diversity and restrict the activities of LGBTIQ organizations. In 2023, the government amended the Child Protection Law to ban the sharing of information on diverse sexual orientations and gender identities, considered “promotion of nontraditional sexual relations.” In April 2024, the Law on Foreign Representatives (“foreign agents” law) was adopted , introducing reporting requirements for foreign-funded NGOs, severely hampering their operations and threatening media freedom. The UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights reported in 2020 that “hate-fueled rhetoric and attitudes toward the LGBTIQ community were rampant,” amplified by incitement to violence by members of parliament. There is no law that protects LGBTIQ people from anti-LGBTIQ hate crimes, which are common and often go unreported for fear of secondary victimization. In 2021 alone, ILGA-Europe reported over a hundred cases of hate-based crimes against LGBTIQ people. Data from the Eurasian Coalition on Male Health ( ECOM ) shows persistent high levels of violence, extortion, and abuse—particularly by law enforcement and health care workers—against people of queer experience in 2024. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International