Dominica High Court overturns ban on same-sex relations Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Home News US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business World of Business Technology of Business NYSE Opening Bell Technology Artificial Intelligence Intelligence Revolution AI v the Mind Tech Now Health Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList To the Ends of the Earth Earth Science Natural Wonders Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcast Categories Radio Audio FAQs Video BBC Maestro Discover the World Live Live News Live Sport Site search Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters Dominica High Court overturns ban on same-sex relations 23 April 2024 Share Save Add as preferred on Google Alys Davies BBC News AFP Dominica's High Court has overturned a ban on consensual same-sex relations in the Caribbean island nation. The court ruled parts of the law that criminalised same-sex activity went against the country's constitution. A gay man living in Dominica who brought the case said the law violated his constitutional rights. LGBTQ activists welcomed the decision, hailing it as "a significant milestone in the ongoing struggle for LGBTQ rights in the Caribbean". The court ruled that sections 14 and 16 of the Sexual Offences Act, which criminalised consensual same-sex activity between adults, were unconstitutional. Writing in the ruling, Justice Kimberly Cenac-Phulgence said the court found they breached the right to liberty, freedom of expression and protection of personal privacy, as enshrined in the country's constitution. The anonymous claimant, an openly gay man, stated that the laws had condemned him "to live in constant fear of criminal sanction for engaging in consensual sexual activity" and further argued that these laws incited "hateful and violent conduct towards him and other LGBT persons" which he said prevented him "from living and expressing himself freely and in dignity". Reacting to the ruling, Daryl Phillip, founder of the charity Minority Rights Dominica (MiRiDom), said: "This ruling sets Dominica on a promising path toward restoring people's dignity and safeguarding LGBTQ people's rights to privacy, health, and freedom from torture and ill-treatment, aligning with international human rights obligations." He added, however, that the ruling did not mean "that homophobia is going to stop tomorrow". "It's a process," Mr Phillip said. Outright International, a human rights LGBTQ NGO, said: "Decriminalisation helps create an environment where LGBTQ individuals can live openly without fear of persecution, enabling them to access health care, education, and employment without facing discrimination." "The repeal of these discriminatory laws is a testament to the tireless efforts of activists, advocates, and allies who have long fought for justice and equality. It is a victory for human rights and a significant milestone in the ongoing struggle for LGBTQ rights in the Caribbean," Outright executive director Maria Sjödin said. Laws criminalising sexual activity between people of the same sex in English-speaking Caribbean nations were first imposed by the British under their rule in the 1800s, according to a report by Outright . In recent years, a number of Anglophone Caribbean nations have repealed such laws, including Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, Belize, Saint Kitts and Nevis, and Trinidad and Tobago. A case is also pending in St Lucia. Caribbean nations where same-sex relations are still criminalised include Guyana, Grenada, Jamaica, and St Vincent and the Grenadines. Barbados scraps laws banning same-sex acts Antigua's ban on same-sex acts unconstitutional Caribbean Dominica LGBT Related US strikes on alleged drug boats could be crimes against humanity, says UN The roots of Notting Hill Carnival ahead of its 60th year Small plane crash in Bahamas kills 10 people More from the BBC 9 hrs ago Theft of church Pride banner reported as hate crime The vicar of St Mark's Church in Sheffield says it is not the first time such items have been taken. 9 hrs ago 1 day ago Rainbow flag wrapped around castle for Pride event Totnes Castle is wrapped in a rainbow flag as part of the Devon town's Pride celebrations. 1 day ago 1 day ago Senedd presiding officer accuses Reform MS of offensive comments in Welsh Gender Service debate Joe Martin called for "butcher" doctors who performed surgery on children to be jailed. 1 day ago 2 days ago 'More will turn up' - Work by Scottish artists unearthed for homecoming exhibition Robert Colquhoun and Robert MacBryde were among the most celebrated figures in British art. 2 days ago 2 days ago Sandie Peggie's views had 'no bearing' on refusing legal support, union says The RCN says its decision not to give Sandie Peggie legal advice had nothing to do with her gender critical views. 2 days ago British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages The BBC is in multiple languages Read the BBC In your own language BBC News Brasil BBC News Mundo (Spanish) BBC News မြန်မာ (Burmese) BBC News 中文 (Chinese) BBC News Indonesia BBC News 코리아 (Korean) BBC News ไทย (Thai) BBC News Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese) BBC News Azərbaycanca (Azeri) BBC News Magyarul (Hungarian) BBC News Кыргыз Кызматы (Kyrgyz) BBC News Polska (Polish) BBC News România (Romanian) BBC News Русская служба (Russian) BBC News na srpskom (Serbian) BBC News Україна (Ukrainian) BBC News O'zbek (Uzbek) BBC News عربي (Arabic) BBC News فارسی (Persian) BBC News Türkçe (Turkish) BBC News বাংলা (Bengali) BBC News دری (Dari) BBC News ગુજરાતી (Gujarati) BBC News हिन्दी (Hindi) BBC News मराठी (Marathi) BBC News नेपाली (Nepali) BBC News සිංහල (Sinhala) BBC News ਪੰਜਾਬੀ (Punjabi) BBC News Afaan Oromoo BBC News አማርኛ (Amharic) BBC News Afrique (French) BBC News Hausa BBC News Gaelic NAIDHEACHDAN BBC News Ìgbò BBC News Japanese 日本語 BBC News Gahuza BBC News Pidgin BBC News Somali BBC News Swahili BBC News தமிழ் (Tamil) BBC News తెలుగు (Telugu) BBC News ትግርኛ (Tigrinya) BBC News اردو (Urdu) BBC News Yorùbá BBC News World Service Follow BBC on: Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Do not share or sell my info Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us BBC.com Help & FAQs Content Index Set Preferred Source Copyright 2026 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.