Good news from Malaysia, Namibia, Ukraine Now Reading Good news from Malaysia, Namibia, Ukraine Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate Good news from Malaysia, Namibia, Ukraine by Colin Stewart August 30, 2016 Colin Stewart Colin Stewart is a 45-year journalism veteran living in Southern… Read Next Homophobic attack on LGBTI rights defender in Tunisia Recent weeks have seen advances for trans people in Ukraine and Malaysia and perhaps for all LGBT people in Namibia. The news items in this recap were excerpted with slight modifications from ILGA’s LGBulleTIn round-up of the world’s LGBTI-related news and UNAIDS’s Equal Eyes : A quick explanation of gender identity, gender expression, sex, and sexual orientation, published by Justice for Sisters. In Malaysia , the Kuala Lumpur High Court ordered the National Registration Department (NRD) to update a trans man’s information on his identity card to better reflect his gender identity and chosen name. The decision, according to Justice for Sisters , “gives new hope” for the trans community in the country. According to Autostraddle , previous attempts in Malaysian courts to allow trans people to change their names and gender markers on their identity cards had been unsuccessful. This time, though, the judge argued that “the plaintiff has a precious constitutional right to life under Article 5(1) of the Federal Constitution, and the concept of ‘life’ under Article 5 must necessarily encompass the Plaintiff’s right to live with dignity as a male and be legally accorded judicial recognition as a male.” The NRD has appealed. John Walters, Namibia’s official ombudsman. (Photo courtesy of The Namibian) In an interview with The Namibian , John Walters, the ombudsman of Namibia, claimed that provisions prohibiting discrimination based on sexual orientation “should be in the Constitution,” and that the old anti-sodomy law “has served its purpose.” “How many prosecutions have there been?” he was quoted as saying in reference to that law. “I believe none over the past 20 years. If we don’t prosecute people, why do we have the act?” According to reports , the debate around LGBTI issues has recently taken centre stage in the country, following a visit to the country by two members of the UN Human Rights Committee. In a recently adopted document, the Committee urged the government to “adopt legislation explicitly prohibiting discrimination based on sexual orientation […,] adopt hate crime legislation punishing homophobic and transphobic violence, “abolish the common law crime of sodomy and include same-sex relationships in the Combating of Domestic Violence Act so as to protect same-sex partners.” However, as Equal Eyes noted, separate from the Walters interview, “All the authorities met by the Delegation expressed that Namibia does not prosecute LGBTI people, but the culture, religion and tradition does not permit any recognition of LGBTI rights in the laws of Namibia. None of the authorities met agreed with the Committee’s recommendations of the need to eliminate the crime of sodomy and the need to include sexual orientation as ground of discrimination and against including the protection of same-sex relations in the Domestic Violence Act as recommended by the Committee.” In Ukraine , a court ordered changes requested by two trans persons to their passports and all other documents without requiring them to undergo sterilization. This article was updated on Aug. 30 to include the Equal Eyes account of developments in Namibia. See Also Uganda releases two women arrested for kissing Related articles: This blog’s archive of articles about Namibia This blog’s archive of articles about Ukraine This blog’s archive of articles about Malaysia Colin Stewart August 30, 2016 The Latest Posts Turkey’s anti-LGBT crackdown expands; activists fight back Proposed Ukraine law would expand ban on anti-LGBTQ discrimination A third of LGBTQ groups say 2025’s drastic cuts will force them to close Bangladesh activists launch petition to end anti-LGBTQ discrimination Uganda’s ‘Not Free’ rating partly due to anti-LGBT laws Appeal to Indonesia to stop listing ‘LGBTQ culture’ as a national threat LGBTI+ rights activists in Turkey seek international support during crackdown Analysis: Cameroon’s anti-gay raids violated Cameroon’s own rules Ghana’s £10m deal is dead; gay fans won’t be lured to homophobic nation Turkey: 162 targeted in anti-LGBTQ+ raids After anti-trans attacks in Pakistan, abuse by doctors, police Previous Article Homophobic attack on LGBTI rights defender in Tunisia Next Article View Comments (0) Leave a Reply Cancel reply Your email address will not be published. Name * E-mail * Website Notify me of new posts by email. Δ Related Posts Proposed Ukraine law would expand ban on anti-LGBTQ discrimination A third of LGBTQ groups say 2025’s drastic cuts will force them to close Rightify Ghana trains dozens of queer youth leaders in advocacy Longtime Jamaican activist celebrates long-term marriage ‘We do not support criminalisation’ — Anglican archbishop in Ghana Ugandan trans pastor honored at WorldPride Amsterdam About The Erasing 76 Crimes news site covers the human toll of 66+ countries’ anti-gay laws and the struggle to repeal them. Member Members of the African Human Rights Media Network publish news articles and other media that educate readers about sexual minorities’ struggle for recognition of their human rights. Partner The St. Paul’s Foundation for International Reconciliation promotes LGBTQ+ rights through fact-based advocacy journalism and community projects. (California charity 80-0647355) © 2026 Erasing 76crimes. All rights reserved. Scroll To Top Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate Facebook Twitter Instagram Discover more from Erasing 76 Crimes Subscribe now to keep reading and get access to the full archive. Type your email… Subscribe Continue reading PRESS ESC TO CLOSE