Anti-LGBTQ discrimination harms economies of Serbia, North Macedonia Politics Local National World Arts & Entertainment Financial Photos Opinions Life Style Noticias en Español Classifieds About Archives Print Edition Find a Copy Subscribe Contact Us Los Angeles Blade Advertise with Us Become A Blade Member Connect with us Washington Blade: LGBTQ News, Politics, LGBTQ Rights, Gay News Anti-LGBTQ discrimination harms economies of Serbia, North Macedonia FUND LGBTQ JOURNALISM Donate Politics Trump-appointed judge restores White House TV pool access White House press pool pushes back after Trump bars three outlets Jeremy Moss looks to bring LGBTQ advocacy from Lansing to Capitol Hill LGBTQ issues, attacks on Democrats dominate unusual RNC midterm convention Ind. prosecutor declines to press charges over false Buttigieg child welfare complaint Local Comings & Goings Former Capital Pride board member reiterates sexual harassment allegation Center for Black Equity’s annual gala to take place Oct. 3 Charles Bowers, former owner of Baltimore gay bar the Hippo, dies Being a female firefighter comes with unique risks, and rewards D.C. Maryland Virginia Delaware Best of Gay DC Photos National Grace Meng sharply criticizes DOJ over hospital settlements Philadelphia event to launch 2026 LGBT History Month Dutch prime minister visits Stonewall Inn For lesbian victims of domestic violence, competent care is scare Long-time DignityUSA executive director announces retirement World Colombia withdraws from Equal Rights Coalition Caso Karlina: Una sentencia histórica contra las terapias de «conversión» Dutch prime minister visits Stonewall Inn Spike in HIV cases prompts Fiji to declare national emergency UN human rights chief sounds alarm over ‘comprehensive onslaught’ against LGBTQ rights Noticias en Español Caso Karlina: Una sentencia histórica contra las terapias de «conversión» Mujer trans salvadoreña es encontrada sin vida Realidad LGBTQ en Honduras: fuga o muerte Un terremoto también se vive desde el exilio Centenares de personas participan en la Marcha del Orgullo en la capital salvadoreña Opinions Washington Blade responds to concerns over White House pool duties Young people should know history of the fight for human rights How emerging drone tech can support LGBTQ workplace inclusion What LGBTQ veterans are building after ‘Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell’ Gun reform is an LGBTQ rights issue Peter Rosenstein Kate Clinton Rick Rosendall Kathi Wolfe Brock Thompson Mark Lee A&E PHOTOS: HRC National Dinner What’s frightening is also funny in ‘Venus’ ‘Lizzie Borden’ might be the best ‘Monster’ yet Tyler Clementi Foundation to host fundraiser in Rehoboth Calendar: September 25-October 1 Television All the queer things to watch this fall ‘Vampire Lestat’ heats up Pride month with queer action Repression, toxic masculinity fuel intense queer drama ‘Half Man’ Spring’s best in queer TV and film Netflix’s ‘The Boyfriend’ is more than a dating show Dining Union Market’s Last Call Bar a welcoming oasis for all RAMMYs honors restaurant industry professionals Behind the bar with Moon Rabbit’s Thi Nguyen My Rehoboth Beach culinary tour New D.C. restaurants opening just in time for spring Theater What’s frightening is also funny in ‘Venus’ D.C.’s fall theater season is already well underway Actress takes on bisexual ‘Ma’ Rainey in new Round House production Immersive ‘Nation-State’ imagines a society free of authoritarianism New GALA show about WWII spy full of conflict, intrigue Film ‘Thelma and Louise’ remains landmark of unspoken queer rebellion ‘Here the Whole Time’ delivers queer coming-of-age comedy ‘Teenage Sex and Death’ has never been more entertaining Queer team brings girl power to fully baked ‘The Wrong Girls’ ‘Maddie’s Secret’ defies campy expectations Music Queer mega stars coming to D.C. this fall DJ Chanel Santini is bringing the heat and some gender-fluid diversity to XBIZ Miami Gaga, Cardi B, and more to grace D.C. stages this spring Washington chorale kicks off Christmas with vibrant program Queer mega stars (and allies) ready to take D.C. stages this fall Books Curl up with a good book this fall Dolly Parton biography puts her hardships into context Historiography with heart New book examines fashionista Audrey Smaltz’s fabulous life New book examines Trump cuts to LGBTQ healthcare Photos PHOTOS: HRC National Dinner PHOTOS: Shenandoah Valley Pride PHOTOS: Walk and 5K to End HIV PHOTOS: Wanda Alston Foundation Fall Reception PHOTOS: SMYAL Fall Brunch Best of Gay DC Contests Financial Factors to consider when hiring an interior designer The LGBTQ real estate map is being redrawn Moving presents a chance to ‘clean house’ With gas prices soaring again, a staycation is a good plan When buying a home, it’s decisions, decisions, decisions Health United States Conference on HIV/AIDS grapples with federal budget cuts AIDS Healthcare Foundation announces 3 million people globally in its care LGBTQ people, weed, and mental health: what you need to know UPDATED: Trans-led HIV clinic in Portsmouth struggles amid funding cuts Housewives head to Capitol Hill to promote PrEP coverage News United States Conference on HIV/AIDS grapples with federal budget cuts AIDS Healthcare Foundation announces 3 million people globally in its care LGBTQ people, weed, and mental health: what you need to know UPDATED: Trans-led HIV clinic in Portsmouth struggles amid funding cuts Housewives head to Capitol Hill to promote PrEP coverage Cannabis Culture LGBTQ people, weed, and mental health: what you need to know New Mexico guv signs marijuana legalization Delaware cannabis activists take on corporate marijuana Virginia marijuana legalization takes effect July 1 Highstream 420 Festival Livestream Fitness NEW YEAR NEW YOU 2020: Local VIDA master trainer on trends, tips and technology at the gym Why a personalized diet can help you achieve better results Al Roker blasts Jillian Michaels for criticizing Keto diet Make 2019 your year for fitness Raising healthy adults starts now Classifieds About Newsletter Sign-Up Print Edition Archives Advertise Los Angeles Blade BECOME A MEMBER Commentary Anti-LGBTQ discrimination harms economies of Serbia, North Macedonia World Bank reports detail GDP impact in two countries Published 3 years ago on October 13, 2023 By Special to the Washington Blade A transgender rights march in Skopje, North Macedonia (Photo by Vancho Djambaski) Share Tweet BY AMARILDO FECANJI | On Sept. 26, 2023, the World Bank published two research reports on the economic cost of excluding lesbian, gay, bisexual, trans and intersex (LGBTI) people in North Macedonia and Serbia. The research study was conducted closely with the regional LGBTI network association ERA. The studies estimate that the annual financial loss due to SOGIESC-based exclusion totals 0.6 percent of North Macedonia’s and Serbia’s GDP. In addition, the research estimates the fiscal yearly loss totaling approximately 0.1 percent of the 2021 GDP in the Republic of Serbia and 0.13 percent of the GDP in North Macedonia. In the Western Balkan region, just like in many other countries, LGBTI people continue to face discrimination and exclusion, which limits their ability to reach their full potential in different areas of life, including education, employment, and physical and mental health. A public opinion poll conducted by ERA earlier in 2023 shows that attitudes towards LGBTIQ+ people remain negative, even though there is a slight improvement compared to a similar survey conducted in 2015. Still, half of the population continues to believe that being LGBTIQ+ is a sickness, reflecting local society’s fundamental negative beliefs towards the community and the low support for more legal and social rights. The effects of stigma, discrimination and exclusion based on sexual orientation, gender identity and expression and sex characteristics (SOGIESC) could cost economies billions of dollars. However, quantifying such costs is hampered by a lack of nationally representative data about LGBTI people in most countries. The findings show significant levels of workplace discrimination in both countries. In North Macedonia, about 14 percent of the LGBTI people had experienced workplace discrimination in hiring, firing, professional advancement, salary, tasks and other job-related situations, while in Serbia, the same was for 16 percent of respondents. Transgender people disproportionately reported experiences of workplace discrimination and lifetime experiences of quitting a job due to workplace discrimination. The study concludes that North Macedonia has an estimated total economic loss of $64 million annually, while for Serbia, this is at $293 million. As for fiscal loss, combining the estimated revenue and expenditure losses and weighting that by the size of the LGBTI population, the study estimates that fiscal losses total $17 million, or 0.13 percent of North Macedonia’s GDP and $88 million, or 0.1 percent of Serbia’s GDP. Bearing in mind that LGBTI people’s experiences with workplace discrimination and exclusion are likely not uniform, which can be reflected in economic losses, self-reported experiences of discrimination and stigma in the workplace are taken into account when estimating the costs of SOGIESC-based exclusion. To implement the theoretical models and avoid any factors that could affect the results, nearly identical online surveys on crucial labor market characteristics of the general population and the LGBTI population were conducted. This study is also an important advocacy and awareness-raising tool for LGBTIQ+ communities and activists in North Macedonia and Serbia. To put a number on the cost of exclusion is an essential message for decision-makers who often overlook this community in their social and economic policies. The ILGA-Europe Annual Rainbow Map and Index for 2023 places Serbia in the 29th place and North Macedonia in the 32nd, requiring both countries to adopt progressive laws and policies. The main community demands for North Macedonia are to introduce fair legal gender recognition, introduce hate speech laws that cover all bias-motivated hate crimes and adopt LGBTIQ+ national action plans with proper allocation of funds. For Serbia, the demands are to legalize same-sex couples, such as registered partnerships, introduce policies that target hatred against LGBTIQ+ people and reform the legal framework for fair and transparent legal gender recognition. Amarildo Fecanji, program director at ERA, reflected on the report’s findings. “This study speaks directly to the countless experiences of LGBTIQ+ people in the Balkans region with discrimination, harassment and exclusion. I recall my experiences in the Albanian labor market before LGBTIQ+ activism became a full-time occupation. I worked in media, advertising, PR, and human resources. In all these companies, I experienced different types of mistreatment, which profoundly impacted my mental health and performance at work. Microaggressions of all sorts, gossip and exclusion from job opportunities are some of the things I experienced. LGBTIQ+ people have experienced this and much more in their local Balkan economies.” Amarildo Fecanji is the Program Director at ERA – LGBTI Equal Rights Association for the Western Balkans and before that was program director at PINK Embassy / Albania from 2011-2015. He holds a B.A. in international relations from SUNY/ESC and an LL.M in public international law from the University of Nottingham. Related Topics: North Macedonia Serbia World Bank Up Next Botswana Pride celebrations shine brighter and more vibrant Don't Miss Time to end progressive LGBTQ organizations’ hypocrisy against Israel Advertisement FUND LGBTQ JOURNALISM SIGN UP FOR E-BLAST Featured Local Savings You may like Report: Grenell wants Russian ambassadorship Double exclusion, equal dignity Former US ambassador to Bosnia criticizes White House’s foreign policy Commentary Washington Blade responds to concerns over White House pool duties Inaccurate media reports create confusion but we stand with our colleagues Published 4 days ago on September 23, 2026 By Kevin Naff A photo from inside the White House on Monday. (Washington Blade photo by Joe Reberkenny) Last week, President Trump announced his unconstitutional ban of CNN, MSNow, and Politico from the White House. Coincidentally, on Monday, it was the Washington Blade’s turn to serve as the print pool reporter on duty covering the president’s actions that day. This important responsibility is shared and rotated among the print members with each serving roughly once per month. The Blade is the only LGBTQ outlet with a seat in the briefing room, a slot in the pool rotation, and membership in the White House Correspondents’ Association, something we fought for decades to secure after enduring years of discrimination, ridicule, and resistance to openly queer journalists working inside the White House. We take our responsibilities there seriously. There are two pools that cover the president: broadcast and print. The other four members of the broadcast pool — ABC, CBS, NBC, and Fox News — agreed to boycott their pool duties. There has been no boycott among the print pool, which is a separate entity. I called the president of the White House Correspondents’ Association on Monday to confirm that no outlets in the print pool were boycotting. A boycott by the Blade would set us back and lead to our expulsion from the pool and briefing room and our replacement by a right-wing outlet sympathetic to President Trump’s approach to attacking the media. The LGBTQ community is far better served with the Blade in the room than a far-right blogger taking our seat. Let’s be clear: the Blade stands for diversity, equity, and inclusion and we stand for the First Amendment and freedom of the press. In solidarity with the broadcast pool, we made two important decisions on Monday — the first day anyone had to think about any of this. First, we refused to take or share any videos or still photos of the president, which would have undermined the broadcast boycott. Second, when Politico’s turn comes up for pool duty in mid-October, the Blade will not fill in and cover for them while they are banned. Politico must be readmitted and allowed to do their job. After a rough day navigating and reporting on all of this, the Advocate published a reckless and inaccurate story suggesting that the Blade had crossed a picket line. Not true, as there is no print pool boycott. They claimed that I wouldn’t talk to their reporter. Also not true. I called their reporter within 90 minutes of receiving his message and he didn’t take the call or call me back. Their story named me and our White House reporter, immediately exposing us to public criticism and worse. The environment in D.C. is so toxic and even violent these days that subjecting our staff to unfair and false accusations like this invites harassment, doxxing, and worse. To do that without even talking to us is next level irresponsible and the antithesis of journalism. On Tuesday, I talked to two reporters and an editor at the Advocate but they refused to retract anything in their inaccurate story. If the reporter had returned my call, I could have explained all of this but they are more concerned with clickbait and sensational headlines, a dangerous practice in these troubled times. Back to the pool. The Blade was in the briefing room in the Reagan era, when Press Secretary Larry Speakes made jokes about AIDS and the reporters in the room laughed out loud. We endured all of that abuse and worse for decades, always standing in the back of the room and never being called on. The Blade’s journalists persevered. When President George W. Bush was re-elected in 2004, the Blade’s White House credentials were revoked amid an earlier press crackdown. Notably, no one boycotted or stood up for us. When Barack Obama won election in 2008, I received an email from his communications director informing me that effective midnight on Jan. 20, 2009, the Blade’s credentials would be restored. So we have had quite a ride navigating administrations and their changing requirements for gaining access but always playing the long game. As Barney Frank used to say, “If you’re not at the table, then you’re probably on the menu.” The Blade is at the table and we do our best to ensure the LGBTQ community’s issues are addressed by both parties. Thanks for reading and supporting the Blade’s work. If you have questions about our approach, you can reach me at [email protected] . Kevin Naff is editor of the Washington Blade. Reach him at [email protected] . Continue Reading Commentary What LGBTQ veterans are building after ‘Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell’ DADT repeal took effect on Sept. 20, 2011. Trans servicemember ban reinstated Published 1 week ago on September 20, 2026 By Lucas F. Schleusener The Pentagon (Photo by icholakov/Bigstock) Fifteen years ago this month, the repeal of “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell” took effect. At the time, the importance of the change was obvious: gay, lesbian, and bisexual Americans would no longer have to hide who they were to wear the uniform. What was harder to see was what would follow: a generation of LGBTQ veterans able to carry their service openly into American civic life. Earlier this month, Alaska state Rep. Andrew Gray, an Army veteran, stood before the Anchorage Assembly and asked the city to recognize Sept. 20 as LGBTQ Veterans Day. His former command sergeant major, Mike Grunst, followed him to the microphone. A 35-year veteran who had served in combat, Grunst called troops who had served while hiding who they were “the bravest I have ever served with.” Then Denise Sudbeck stepped forward. A Vietnam-era Navy veteran, she thanked the country for the privilege of serving and asked that the next generation have the same chance. The Assembly approved the recognition. Nothing about the scene required a new vocabulary. A veteran made a request of his community. A commander vouched for those who served beside him. Another veteran asked that younger Americans inherit the opportunity she valued. They entered the civic record simply as veterans. That identity can do more than win recognition. When federal policy abruptly ended the careers of transgender servicemembers this year, veterans and servicemembers in California began asking a practical question: What happens when those Americans come home? Republican Assemblyman Jeff Gonzalez, a Marine combat veteran, began one hearing with questions about transgender military service. He listened as veterans explained how the military handles medical care and deployment case by case. Then the discussion turned to separation. “I don’t wanna see any veteran homeless,” Gonzalez said. Before the hearing ended, he was asking: “How can I help? How can I understand? How can I be a good advocate?” The legislation that followed would provide housing, employment and transition assistance to discharged servicemembers. Republican state Sen. Shannon Grove spoke for it. The Senate passed it 32 to 0. Americans have plainly not settled their disagreements over transgender people. Nor should military service be a prerequisite for rights that belong to every citizen. But military service creates relationships that are difficult to reduce to the abstractions of the culture war. Before a legislature, “the transgender issue” can become a veteran who deployed, an officer who led troops, or the person who once stood beside you. The political question changes because the human relationship has already changed. The pattern is beginning to appear across the country. Kansas is among the states recognizing LGBTQ Veterans Day for the first time this year. New York and Virginia are pursuing broader state-level programs for LGBTQ veterans. Sept. 20 is deliberate. On that day in 2011, “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell” ended. We usually remember repeal for what LGBTQ Americans gained: the ability to serve openly. Fifteen years later, we can also see what the country gained. A gay veteran can stand before his local government beside the commander who once led him. A transgender servicemember can sit before a legislator who begins with doubts and ends by asking how he can help. A veteran from an older generation can ask her neighbors to give those who follow her the same chance to serve. This is citizenship in practice. The enduring legacy of “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell” repeal is not only that Americans were finally allowed to serve openly. It is also what they can now build after coming home. Continue Reading Commentary Anti-science, anti-LGBTQ movements go hand in hand HHS under RFK Jr. has blocked gender-affirming care for youth Published 3 weeks ago on September 8, 2026 By Ayman Eckford HHS Secretary Robert F. Kennedy Jr. (Washington Blade photo by Michael Key) A newborn baby died after contracting measles in Pennsylvania last month, and, as if it wasn’t enough grief for his parents, anti-vax activists are trying to track down and harass his family. Apparently, Gov. Josh Shapiro tangled with Robert F. Kennedy Jr. over his “inaccurate and misleading claims.” On Aug. 26, RFK Jr., the secretary of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, declared that the deaths could be fabricated . We live in peculiar times, when it is government officials, not freaks on the internet, who are spreading conspiracy theories. The new spread of measles in the United States since Donald Trump came to power is one of the most shameful parts of the story of modern American politics, and the tragedy of parents who lost their baby because more and more people refused to vaccinate may seem absolutely unrelated to LGBTQ rights, but actually, there is a pretty solid connection. Because RFK Jr., the same man who was fighting vaccination, promoted the false idea that vaccines caused autism, and even curated the anti-vaccine organization Children’s Health Defense before going into politics, is also a known opponent of transgender rights. Under his “leadership,” gender-affirming care for trans minors was banned, and there were also created new healthcare guidelines recognizing only two genders. All around the globe, there is a weird correlation between anti-LGBTQ — particularly anti-trans — ideas and anti-science movements. And it should be clearer to the general public. People who are speaking against LGBTQ rights are not just threatening minorities. They are a danger to everyone. The Trump-Vance administration is an iconic example of such tendencies. Trump himself is a known critic of modern scientific studies — for example, believing in the same anti-vax conspiracies that Kennedy promoted, and showing obvious skepticism that global warming exists, despite all the evidence that has been shown by climatologists. And he is also a man who used trans people as boogeymen. Under his command, trans people were kicked out of the military. And even worse, recently he made an extremely chilling statement about the 2026 midterm elections, urging voters to “pretend I’m on the ballot” and vote for Republicans, and while discussing what he says is at stake, he said that if Republicans win, “transgenderism” will “end.” This is an offensive statement at best and genocidal at worst. And, of course, I think everyone remembers the Department of Government Efficiency (DOGE), which was led by infamous billionaire Elon Musk, who announced to the world that he would destroy the “woke mind virus” that killed his child just because his trans daughter, Vivian Wilson, well, is happy to be a trans person. DOGE is known not just for cancelling academic research around LGBTQ studies and gender studies. No, this agency abruptly canceled and froze thousands of federal science, research, and health grants , attacking such vital health programs as cancer research , vaccination research, and diabetes research, among others. As you can see, they are not just attacking people who are “affected” by the “mind” virus — they are dangerous to everyone, even if most of the public standing of Musk was around his anti-trans politics and he tried to present himself as a pro-science, pro-progress man by supporting the space industry. An even more vivid example is the so-called Dark Enlightenment movement. This extremely reactionary political movement was born in the late 2000s, and originally grew from very democratical classical liberal ideas. Until it became anti-democratic itself. And also often It was created by American software engineer Curtis Yarvin (writing under the pseudonym Mencius Moldbug) and expanded by British philosopher Nick Land. The movement is popular among some Silicon Valley businessmen, and got support from PayPal founder Peter Thiel, and one of their main ideas is that modernity is bad. They are basically obscurantists, who see modern universities as part of “the Cathedral ” — a system that, in their opinion, promotes equality and modern science that society doesn’t need. Of course, the movement’s followers are mostly anti-LGBTQ rights, and, as you can see, anti-queerness once again go hand in hand with obscurantism. Unfortunately, the movement got the support of extremely prominent politicians, including U.S. Vice President JD Vance. In his speech from 2021, Vance proved to be an obscurantist when he claimed that universities are the enemy . He is also a known homophobe and transphobe. So, why are anti-vaxxers, people who oppose modern scientific studies, and people who hate universities more likely to be queerphobic? Why do the same people who are defending their transphobia by showing that they support common sense actually often show zero such sense when it comes to protecting themselves and their children from measles or decreasing the chances of getting cancer? We don’t have any statistics or studies that show that all obscurantists are queerphobic, but around the globe, the same dynamic is visible. In Russian anti-LGBTQ censorship, books about animal biology and zoology have been censored because the censors saw “LGBT propaganda” in them. The famous pro-Putin philosopher Alexander Dugin, who is extremely anti-queer, also speaks up against modernity itself. In Taliban’s Afghanistan, modern science and LGBTQ rights are attacked at the same time. Even in the UK, Reform UK is known as the most anti-trans and anti-queer party, and they are facing widespread criticism from scientists and medical experts for promoting climate change denial and anti-vaccine ideas. It doesn’t mean that LGBTQ supporters never believe in conspiracy theories or that progressive politicians always support science. No, it just means that explicit anti-science and anti-LGBTQ statements often go hand in hand. I think there are two reasons for this correlation. First, LGBTQ people are real. You cannot deny that sex is not binary, gender and sex are different, and transition improves the quality of life of actual trans people. Or that same-sex relationships are natural, because even animals have same-sex sexual contacts. To deny it, you need an ideology or a conspiracy theory. The second reason is that anti-scientific populism and anti-LGBTQ conspiracy theories are popular among the same category of people. It’s a “ bundle ” of ideas — a trend that conservative voters often adopt together. Studies also show that people who are likely to believe in one conspiracy theory are more likely to believe in another. But the question is more broad. We don’t speak enough about the harm anti-scientific conspiracy theories and obscurantist politicians around the globe create for mankind in general. Not all people would suffer from a prohibition of hormone therapy, or attacks on same-sex marriage. But anti-global warming ideas, anti-vax advocates, and restrictions on modern research, especially medical research, are potentially dangerous to any human being. And one of the best things LGBTQ activists could do is just show society that they are being used — that the same people who are stealing LGBTQ rights are also destroying medicine and the environment, and it’s a threat to their own traditional families and future of all kids no less than to queer people. Continue Reading Advertisement Latest Popular Real Estate 15 minutes ago Factors to consider when hiring an interior designer Photos 3 hours ago PHOTOS: HRC National Dinner Real Estate 6 hours ago The LGBTQ real estate map is being redrawn Advice 7 hours ago I’m 66, he’s 27. Is it love or am I being played? Theater 7 hours ago What’s frightening is also funny in ‘Venus’ Commentary 4 days ago Washington Blade responds to concerns over White House pool duties LGBTQ Non-Profit Organizations 4 days ago Gov. Whitmer to serve as keynote speaker for Saturday’s HRC National Dinner Fiji 4 days ago Spike in HIV cases prompts Fiji to declare national emergency District of Columbia 4 days ago Capital Pride chair resigns from board after just 10 months Online Culture 4 days ago Clavicular charged in alleged rape of teenage influencer Advertisement Sign Up for Weekly E-Blast Advertisement Popular Commentary 4 days ago Washington Blade responds to concerns over White House pool duties LGBTQ Non-Profit Organizations 4 days ago Gov. Whitmer to serve as keynote speaker for Saturday’s HRC National Dinner Fiji 4 days ago Spike in HIV cases prompts Fiji to declare national emergency District of Columbia 4 days ago Capital Pride chair resigns from board after just 10 months About Advertise Contact Us Find A Copy Classifieds Privacy Policy Terms of Service RSS Syndication © Copyright Brown, Naff, Pitts Omnimedia, Inc. 2021. All rights reserved | Powered by Keynetik .