Belize turnaround on gay rights: 'Unbelievable!' Now Reading Belize turnaround on gay rights: ‘Unbelievable!’ Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate Belize turnaround on gay rights: ‘Unbelievable!’ by Colin Stewart November 20, 2018 Colin Stewart Colin Stewart is a 45-year journalism veteran living in Southern… Read Next Ukraine police and protesters disrupt trans rights march Belize has vowed major improvements in the treatment of its LGBTI citizens. That promise of progress on gay rights comes just two years after the Central American country seemed to be a bastion of homophobia, clinging to an anti-gay law until it was overturned in the Belize Supreme Court in 2016. Location of Belize, which has experienced a turnabout on gay rights Gay rights activist Caleb Orozco, who led the fight against that anti-gay law, reports on how Belize responded to recommendations about issues of sexual orientation and gender identity (SOGI) that it received during its recent U.N.-sponsored Universal Periodic Review (UPR) of the country’s human rights record. Belize accepted 15 of 17 SOGI recommendations for the U.P.R. — unbelievable! By Caleb Orozco Belize accepted 15 of 17 SOGI recommendations and as many as 10 countries made recommendations for the development of a National Human Rights Institution. Belize now becomes the first Caribbean Community (CARICOM) country to accept that many recommendations. We have dared to set many firsts. The first country in CARICOM to decriminalized. The first and only country in the Commonwealth to implement a hybrid strategy to advance significant criminal code legislation. We were the first to co-sponsor an LGBT resolution at the Organization of American States (OAS). It’s totally crazy to see the 180-degree turn in the state’s SOGI position. I remain hopeful our country can continue in the right direction where the value of good governance adds to our development along with a greater quality of life for all. These are the recommendations that Belize accepted and the countries that made them: See Also African and global figures by the dozens urge Senegal to talk, not enforce anti-gay law Take further proper legislative measures to address discrimination against different groups (Ukraine); Guarantee the rights of everyone to equal protection under the law, in conformity with Belize’s international commitments (Iceland); Carry out the necessary legal reforms so that the legislation guarantees the protection and promotion of the rights of the LGBTI persons thereby avoiding discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity (Spain); Ensure legal protections are enforced to address violence against LGBTI individuals as well as discrimination such as in housing, employment and government services (United States of America); Take the necessary measures to investigate and punish cases of discrimination based on sexual orientation (Argentina); Take further measures to reduce the societal stigma faced by LGBTI persons, including through enacting laws that prohibit discrimination against them (Australia); Adopt specific legislation aimed at eradicating, punishing and preventing all forms of discrimination, violence or abuse against people based on their sexual orientation or gender identity (Chile); Combat discrimination against LGBTI persons (France); Secure equal human rights for LGBTI persons by adding sexual orientation and gender identity to the anti-discrimination legislation, in order to protect LGBTI persons against discrimination and violence (Germany); Take measures to fight all forms of discrimination, including those based on sexual orientation and gender identity (Italy); Include sexual orientation and gender identity in the collection of statistical data in order to develop policies that effectively combat violence, discrimination and harassment against LGBTI persons (Mexico); Strengthen the capacities of police officers to better treat cases of violence against sexual workers and LGBTI persons (Uruguay); Develop and implement training programmes for State authorities, including law enforcement and judicial officials, to ensure non-discrimination and protection of LGBTI persons (Ireland) Take concrete steps to ensure universal access to sexual and reproductive health services, including HIV tests, with particular attention to the specific needs of women and girls, and the LGBTI population (Brazil); Ensure that an effective HIV/AIDS Prevention Strategy includes the principles of human rights and non-discrimination on the basis of gender, age, sexual orientation or gender identity (Iceland). Belize also “noted” these recommendations: Include an explicit prohibition of discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or gender identity in the Constitution and amend any other relevant legislation, such as the Administration of Estates Act and the Social Security Act, in order for same-sex couples to enjoy equal rights a heterosexual couples (Netherlands); Review the Constitution and legislation in order to explicitly prohibit discrimination on the basis of gender and sexual orientation (Uruguay). Caleb Orozco is executive director of the United Belize Advocacy Movement (Unibam). Related articles: By Dropping Appeal, Belize Catholic Church Allows Decriminalization Decision to Stand (March 8, 2018, New Ways Ministry) Top court in Belize overturns sodomy law (Aug. 10, 2016, 76crimes.com) Belize activist: ‘I’ve sacrificed my life to this work’ (June 2015, 76crimes.com) Death threats, symbols of death haunt Belize LGBTs (July 2013, 76crimes.com) Caribbean overview: LGBT rights vs. anti-gay status quo (August 2013, 76crimes.com) An LGBT victory in Belize (September 2013, 76crimes.com) Archive of this blog’s articles about Belize . More context: 73 countries where homosexuality is illegal 1000s who died in anti-gay, anti-trans attacks (updates) 100s are in prison for being gay 14 nations have death penalty for gay sex; 5 carry it out 21 varieties of traditional African homosexuality 35 Commonwealth nations have laws against gay sex Colin Stewart November 20, 2018 The Latest Posts Turkey’s anti-LGBT crackdown expands; activists fight back Proposed Ukraine law would expand ban on anti-LGBTQ discrimination A third of LGBTQ groups say 2025’s drastic cuts will force them to close Bangladesh activists launch petition to end anti-LGBTQ discrimination Uganda’s ‘Not Free’ rating partly due to anti-LGBT laws Appeal to Indonesia to stop listing ‘LGBTQ culture’ as a national threat LGBTI+ rights activists in Turkey seek international support during crackdown Analysis: Cameroon’s anti-gay raids violated Cameroon’s own rules Ghana’s £10m deal is dead; gay fans won’t be lured to homophobic nation Turkey: 162 targeted in anti-LGBTQ+ raids Liberia again weighs tightening anti-gay laws Previous Article Ukraine police and protesters disrupt trans rights march Next Article View Comment (1) Master Adrian says: November 20, 2018 at 4:19 pm The promisse is good, the facts must be realized first, before I believe the change! Reply Leave a Reply Cancel reply Your email address will not be published. Name * E-mail * Website Notify me of new posts by email. Δ Related Posts Spotlight on Burundi, where the president wants gays to be stoned Malawi’s human rights advocates seek an end to anti-LGBT laws 2024 LGBTQ Rights Global Progress – Latin America and Caribbean Dominica LGBT activist says queer people still aren’t free Caribbean: High court in St. Vincent rejects challenge to anti-LGBTQ+ laws Ghana official falsely claims ‘no known record’ of anti-gay violence; anti-LGBTQ attacks persist About The Erasing 76 Crimes news site covers the human toll of 66+ countries’ anti-gay laws and the struggle to repeal them. Member Members of the African Human Rights Media Network publish news articles and other media that educate readers about sexual minorities’ struggle for recognition of their human rights. Partner The St. Paul’s Foundation for International Reconciliation promotes LGBTQ+ rights through fact-based advocacy journalism and community projects. (California charity 80-0647355) © 2026 Erasing 76crimes. All rights reserved. Scroll To Top Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate Facebook Twitter Instagram Discover more from Erasing 76 Crimes Subscribe now to keep reading and get access to the full archive. Type your email… Subscribe Continue reading PRESS ESC TO CLOSE