Guadeloupe: 2025 annus mirabilis for the LGBT+ community? Now Reading Organization plans more social activities for Guadeloupe’s LGBT community Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate Organization plans more social activities for Guadeloupe’s LGBT community by Moïse Manoël-Florisse March 21, 2025 Moïse Manoël-Florisse Moïse Manoël-Florisse, is an African-Caribbean online journalist keeping an eye… Read Next In Uganda, AIDS-fighting drop-in centers have closed, UN reports Guadeloupe activist says regular events help build LGBT unity Secret’s Out president Leïla from an appearance on Guadeloupe la 1ère’s Sans Rendez-Vous program. 2025 should be a year rich in LGBT-friendly events for Guadeloupe, with Secret’s Out, Queer Gang , and Lovo Nova partnering to offer social activities for the island’s gays and lesbians. 76crimes spoke with Secret’s Out president Leïla about her organization’s work to build community on Guadeloupe. 76crimes: In November, a flyer circulated on social media announcing the holding of a Pride march on the quiet and discreet island of Marie-Galante, renowned for its exquisite rum products. What was the experience like there? Secret’s Out: I went there, but there was no Pride march in the streets of Grand-Bourg, Marie-Galante. It was a festive, gay-friendly time, from noon to midnight. 76crimes: Are you working to build synergies with the Guadeloupe Islands Tourism Committee (CTIG), given that each year this body receives a generous budget without any apparent emphasis on developing gay-friendly tourism ? Secret’s Out : It’s a matter of time, resources, and priorities for Secret’s Out. We’ll approach them once we’ve better defined the projects we can offer them. 76crimes: What are the association’s most notable recent activities? Secret’s Out: In 2024, every 2nd and 4th Thursday of each month, we held a session from 5:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. in a third space called Île Y A Kaz to organize talks and liberate our participants’ expression and speech, by deconstructing certain stereotypes or engaging them in dialogue and questioning them. In 2025, we would like to repeat this activity, but in a city other than Pointe-à-Pitre, in order to offer more leisure spaces to our audience. See Also 2025 LGBTQ rights update: Progress and backsliding in Latin America and Caribbean Also, every Tuesday, we organize an after-work event called Kaz Queer in conjunction with Queer Gang and Lovo Nova . It is regular events like these that help to unite social groups and communities, and during these times of distance, we encourage confidences, storytelling, advice, leadership, as well as times for games and fun. Finally, more occasionally, I am invited to speak in prisons or schools. Each time, the issue of religion is extremely pressing, but nevertheless, I find that the audience is eager for discussion while respecting everyone’s beliefs. The prisoners’ testimonies about how their way of thinking has evolved are what moves me most, and it gives me the strength to continue my activism alongside my professional activity. Other events are planned for 2025, but we want to keep the suspense going. Moïse Manoël-Florisse March 21, 2025 The Latest Posts Turkey’s anti-LGBT crackdown expands; activists fight back Proposed Ukraine law would expand ban on anti-LGBTQ discrimination A third of LGBTQ groups say 2025’s drastic cuts will force them to close Bangladesh activists launch petition to end anti-LGBTQ discrimination Uganda’s ‘Not Free’ rating partly due to anti-LGBT laws Appeal to Indonesia to stop listing ‘LGBTQ culture’ as a national threat LGBTI+ rights activists in Turkey seek international support during crackdown Analysis: Cameroon’s anti-gay raids violated Cameroon’s own rules Ghana’s £10m deal is dead; gay fans won’t be lured to homophobic nation Turkey: 162 targeted in anti-LGBTQ+ raids Edwin Chiloba, my first love Previous Article In Uganda, AIDS-fighting drop-in centers have closed, UN reports Next Article View Comments (0) Leave a Reply Cancel reply Your email address will not be published. Name * E-mail * Website Notify me of new posts by email. Δ Related Posts Haiti’s wary LGBT+ activists brace for first elections in 10 years Senegal women subjected to degrading anal examinations Cameroon’s LGBTI community in peril as leaders flee Senegal Court blocks constitutional ban on same-sex marriage Pride Social Forum to unite LGBTQ African activists in Benin LGBTQIA+ Kréyòl Pride to bring people together in Guadeloupe and beyond About The Erasing 76 Crimes news site covers the human toll of 66+ countries’ anti-gay laws and the struggle to repeal them. Member Members of the African Human Rights Media Network publish news articles and other media that educate readers about sexual minorities’ struggle for recognition of their human rights. Partner The St. Paul’s Foundation for International Reconciliation promotes LGBTQ+ rights through fact-based advocacy journalism and community projects. (California charity 80-0647355) © 2026 Erasing 76crimes. All rights reserved. Scroll To Top Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate Facebook Twitter Instagram Discover more from Erasing 76 Crimes Subscribe now to keep reading and get access to the full archive. Type your email… Subscribe Continue reading PRESS ESC TO CLOSE