Lebanon | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Lebanon At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? No Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? No Legal Gender Recognition Possible? No LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? No Last Update: March 12, 2026 Lebanon’s penal code prohibits “any sexual intercourse contrary to the order of nature,” which has been regularly used to arrest and prosecute people of queer experience. Several courts have ruled that this law does not apply to same-sex relations , but the law remains in force and contributes to discrimination against LGBTIQ people . While some politicians have started to express support for the repeal of the ban, hate speech by politicians and religious leaders remains an issue . Transgender people have been allowed to change their legal gender markers, but only after undergoing surgical procedures . LGBTIQ activists are vocal but vulnerable to violence and police harassment due to their visibility. In June 2022, the Interior Ministry banned all gatherings aimed at “promoting sexual perversion.” In the same year, a conservative Christian group called “ the soldiers of God ” was formed. It has attacked several queer bars and drag shows. Following the murder of a trans woman in 2024, LGBTIQ advocacy group Helem denounced the killing as “part of a series of attacks and crimes targeting trans women by organized gangs.” Sectarian groups have sought to outdo one another in scapegoating queer communities. Public discourse around gender and sexuality remained polarized, with recurring hate speech by political and religious figures contributing to an unsafe environment for visible activists, leading several to leave the country. The lives of sexual and gender minorities peoples’ lives remain shaped by structural discrimination , political paralysis, and overlapping humanitarian crises . View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International