OAR@UM: The lived experiences of transgender inmates at Malta’s Correctional Service Agency Skip navigation Home Browse Communities & Collections Browse Items by: Author Title Subject Issue Date Material Type Language Access Rights Help OAR@UM Help FAQs OAR@UM Policies Submission Forms Sign on to: My OAR@UM OAR@UM Faculty of Education Dissertations - FacEdu Dissertations - FacEdu - 2024 Please use this identifier to cite or link to this item: https://www.um.edu.mt/library/oar/handle/123456789/142152 Title: The lived experiences of transgender inmates at Malta’s Correctional Service Agency Authors: Vidal, Oriana (2024) Keywords: Transgender people -- Crimes against -- Malta Sex crimes -- Malta Stigma (Social psychology) -- Malta Transgender people -- Imprisonment -- Malta Issue Date: 2024 Citation: Vidal, O. (2024). The lived experiences of transgender inmates at Malta’s Correctional Service Agency (Master's dissertation). Abstract: This qualitative research study examines the daily struggles of trans and gender diverse (TGD) inmates in Malta, set against the backdrop of the country's progressive equality laws. The objective is to explore the challenges faced by these inmates through their personal experiences. Four semi-structured interviews were conducted with both former and current TGD inmates within Malta's Corrections Service Agency (CSA). This study’s cohort of participants interviewed was from the last 25 years. Thematic analysis was used to analyse the data gathered (Braun & Clarke, 2006). Four key variables emerged as likely explanations for the obstacles TGD inmates encounter during and after incarceration: healthcare concerns, legislative issues, knowledge and education gaps, and aspects related to postrelease life. The analysed findings are presented through two creative non-fictional narratives (Clough, 2002), which meticulously and ethically capture the significance of the experiences of TGD inmates at Malta’s CSA. This study highlights the heteronormative binary assumptions that have traditionally dominated the practices, policies, and procedures within this institution of confinement. It identifies how operational aspects can lead to the social alienation of TGD individuals. The research findings indicate a lack of synchronisation between the CSA culture and national Maltese legislation, underlining the need for significant improvements to ensure the equal treatment of these vulnerable and socially marginalised individuals. Consequently, due to an enriched understanding of these elements, the study aims to put forward concrete proposals and measures, including training for staff, policy reforms, and increased support services, to ensure an environment at CSA that is respectful and protective and that dignifies TGD inmates, regardless of sexual orientation and/or gender identity. Description: M. Access Ed.(Melit.) URI: https://www.um.edu.mt/library/oar/handle/123456789/142152 Appears in Collections: Dissertations - FacEdu - 2024 Files in This Item: File Description Size Format The Lived Experiences of Transgender Inmates at Malta's Correctional Services Agency.pdf 3.33 MB Adobe PDF View/Open Show full item record Statistics Items in OAR@UM are protected by copyright, with all rights reserved, unless otherwise indicated.