Vatican blocks appointment of gay diplomat | PinkNews About Us Advertise Work with us Login Register Latest News View all UK US World Health Politics Sport Business Culture View all TV Film Celebrity Drag Theatre Music Gaming Lifestyle View all Beauty Careers Fashion Relationships Travel Shopping View all Deals Recommended Fashion & Beauty Tickets Video View all News & Politics Entertainment Lifestyle Discover Trans Awareness Week Drag Race Explainers The Queer Agenda Toggle menu Account Register Login Community Vatican blocks appointment of gay diplomat Oct 02 2008 Written by PinkNews Staff Writer Share Save for later Comment The next French envoy to the Holy See has been chosen after Roman Catholic officials rejected the first candidate because he is gay. AFP reports that another candidate was rejected because he is divorced. The rejected gay candidate, Jean-Loup Kuhn-Delforge, is in a civil pact with his partner and is a career diplomat. The Pope visited France last month and was happy to be received by President Nicolas Sarkozy and Carla Bruni, who divorced his first wife to marry Ms Bruni. France’s ambassador to Moscow, Stanislas Lefebvre de Laboulaye, will take the Vatican post. The Holy See, which governs the Vatican City and represents the Roman Catholic Church, sends ambassadors to countries and international organisations such as the UN. Nations have sent ambassadors or envoys to the See since medieval times. The Roman Catholic Church is opposed to gay rights and any attempts to protect or recognise gay relationships in law. More: Europe Queer News. Straight Up. The LGBTQ+ stories you don’t want to miss, delivered to your inbox daily. Email address required Must be valid email Register By registering you agree to our Privacy Policy Thanks for registering! You can update your email subscriptions at any time in the My profile section of your account. Dec 05 2022 26 LGBTQ+ couples we were rooting for but whose break-ups really, really hurt Related articles Religion May 09 2025 Gay couple go viral after kissing in the Vatican as new pope announced News Nov 21 2024 The Vatican joins Saudi Arabia, Iran and Russia in blocking vital climate deal over LGBTQ+ issues Religion May 28 2024 Vatican apologises after Pope Francis allegedly uses gay slur Religion Sep 21 2022 Belgian Catholic bishops defy Vatican and agree to bless ‘committed’ same-sex unions Religion Aug 18 2021 German minister slams Vatican for ‘blessing guinea pigs but not gay people’ Latest News Previous Next Celebrity Sep 25 Trans influencer calls out Nikki Glaser for stand-up joke about what’s ‘in her pants’ Culture Sep 25 Trans pro wrestling trailblazer Gisele Shaw signs exclusive NWA contract Bisexual Sep 25 The Traitors star Freddie Fraser’s mum’s emotional response to his coming out Celebrity Sep 25 Lili Reinhart says Hollywood ‘too afraid’ to greenlight lesbian vampire project Celebrity Sep 25 Carly Rae Jepsen describes moment Heated Rivalry inspired her son’s name Celebrity Sep 25 John Green ‘heartbroken’ for trans Harry Potter fans as he talks JK Rowling Current Affairs Sep 25 JD Vance claims James Talarico has a “weird obsession with children in drag” News Sep 25 Susan Sarandon, Hannah Einbinder and Caleb Hearon detained outside UN after protesting Netanyahu What to buy now Previous Next Fashion Mar 27 Connor Ives and MAC team up to re-release the iconic ‘Protect The Dolls’ t-shirt Music Mar 12 The Pussycat Dolls confirm reunion with new single and tour – how to get tickets Music Jan 23 A full guide to the 2026 Harry Styles Together, Together tour including dates and presale info Shopping Nov 24 2025 Ten truly awesome Christmas gifts you can buy to support queer-owned businesses Trans Sep 09 2025 Lush creates ‘luxurious’ trans flag bath bomb to support trans charities Tickets Jun 25 2025 Dolly Parton announces mini Las Vegas residency after wrapping her last tour almost a decade ago Shopping May 15 2025 LEGO celebrates late gay icon Keith Haring with new art set: ‘Want this so bad’ Music Apr 18 2025 Primavera Sound’s most iconic queer performances, from Troye Sivan to Ethel Cain Exclusive Previous Next Exclusive Sep 11 Ania Magliano talks SNL UK season two and anti-LGBTQ voices in comedy: ‘We do edgy in the right way’ Exclusive Sep 11 Elliot Tuttle on Blue Film’s personal inspiration, rejection and taboo: ‘It’s about loneliness’ Exclusive Sep 09 OF star Andy Lee on love for gay fans, ‘poisonous’ creators and ‘harmful’ stunts: ‘Gay men lift me up every day’ Exclusive Sep 07 Real Housewives of London spill the tea: ‘She’d go to the opening of a packet of crisps’ Opinion Sep 04 Katseye in London: A showcase of real talent deserving of the deafening screams Exclusive Sep 02 Adrian Chiarella and Joe Bird on tackling conversion therapy in gay horror Leviticus Exclusive Aug 21 Sziget Festival drag and circus troupe want audiences to feel like family Exclusive Aug 20 Gay wrestler Anthony Bowens says Heated Rivalry shows authentic life of closeted athletes Register to save articles and more. It'll only take a minute and it's free. JOIN US TODAY! Already have an account? Log in here "/> Download the PinkNews app Award winning LGBTQ+ journalism About us Editorial Policy Contact us Advertise Work for us Terms and conditions Privacy policy Privacy manager Privacy Manager