Tunisia drops anal tests, but not its anti-gay law Now Reading Tunisia drops anal tests, but not its anti-gay law Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate Tunisia drops anal tests, but not its anti-gay law by Colin Stewart September 27, 2017 Colin Stewart Colin Stewart is a 45-year journalism veteran. He is the… Read Next Brain before Bible: an interview with a strong Jamaican ally Photo illustration by Kapitalis.com Tunisia has pledged to the United Nations that it will no longer use forced anal testing in cases of homosexuality. But don’t rejoice too much, warns the online news site Kapitalis.com. Anal tests are an abusive medical procedure that its advocates believe, incorrectly, can prove whether a suspect is homosexual. Kapitalis.com stated: The agreement was made by Mehdi Ben Gharbia, Tunisia’s minister for relations with constitutional agencies, civil society and human rights, on Sept. 21 in Geneva, Switzerland, during the presentation of the third U.N. periodic report about human rights in Tunisia. Tunisia accepted 189 of the 248 recommendations made to it by U.N. countries, which urged it to improve its record on human rights and to abolish all forms of torture, including abuse of homosexuals. Mounir Baatour, president of the advocacy organization Shams, which seeks the repeal of Tunisia’s anti-homosexuality law. (Photo by Shams Mag) The Tunisian minister, however, did not accept the recommendation that the country repeal Article 230 of the penal code, which prohibits sodomy, and provides for a prison sentence of up to 3 years in prison. But he did commit to the recommendation on the elimination of the “forced anal test,” considered as proof of guilt of persons suspected of homosexuality and who are imprisoned in accordance with Article 230. This news, which was met with widespread rejoicing, was not met so enthusiastically by the activists at the Shams organization, which defends the rights of homosexuals. In particular, its president, Mounir Baatour, told Kapitalis that the Minister’s commitment to abandoning the forced anal test is just smoke and mirrors. “The anal test has never been forced, but if the suspect refuses to comply, the judge retains the presumption of guilt. What have we gained? Nothing, since finally harassment, torture and arrest of homosexuals will continue in Tunisia,” said the president of Shams, accusing the government of playing with words to circumvent the pressure of the UN on this subject. The Jerusalem Post and Agence France-Presse reported: See Also Turkey’s anti-LGBT crackdown expands; activists fight back Ben Gharbia told AFP that authorities could still perform anal tests on men suspected of being gay, but “these exams can no longer be imposed by force, physical or moral, or without the consent of the person concerned.” He declined to cite a date as to when the new policy against the tests would be implemented. He added that judges could demand that a man undergo the test, “but that person has every right to refuse, without his refusal being held up as proof of homosexuality.” The minister said Tunisia was “committed to protecting the sexual minority from any form of stigmatization, discrimination and violence,” adding that “civil society must first be prepared” for such change in a Muslim country. Related articles: Kenya petition seeks halt to abusive anal testing (January 2017, 76crimes.com) 2 arrests in Tunisia; protests block anal tests (December 2016, 76crimes.com) Abusive anal exams get a thumbs-up from Kenyan judge (June 2016, 76crimes.com) U.N. panel to Tunisia: Stop forced anal exams (May 2016, 76crimes.com) Forced anti-gay anal tests face legal challenge in Kenya (May 2016, 76crimes.com) Tunisia: Protests against anal exam, sodomy sentence (September 2015) Anti-gay Ugandan tactic: Abusive, worthless anal exam (May 2014) Outcry against anal exams by police in Lebanon (August 2012) Colin Stewart September 27, 2017 The Latest Posts Turkey’s anti-LGBT crackdown expands; activists fight back Proposed Ukraine law would expand ban on anti-LGBTQ discrimination A third of LGBTQ groups say 2025’s drastic cuts will force them to close Bangladesh activists launch petition to end anti-LGBTQ discrimination Uganda’s ‘Not Free’ rating partly due to anti-LGBT laws Appeal to Indonesia to stop listing ‘LGBTQ culture’ as a national threat LGBTI+ rights activists in Turkey seek international support during crackdown Analysis: Cameroon’s anti-gay raids violated Cameroon’s own rules Ghana’s £10m deal is dead; gay fans won’t be lured to homophobic nation Turkey: 162 targeted in anti-LGBTQ+ raids Kenya: LGBTI refugees trek for protection; funds needed Previous Article Brain before Bible: an interview with a strong Jamaican ally Next Article View Comments (2) Leave a Reply Cancel reply Your email address will not be published. Name * E-mail * Website Notify me of new posts by email. Δ Related Posts Haiti’s wary LGBT+ activists brace for first elections in 10 years Will Uganda’s candidate for top UN post speak out against homophobia? Senegal women subjected to degrading anal examinations Why LGBT rights activists oppose U.N. resolution against anti-LGBT laws Ukraine LGBTQ people face sexual violence in Russia-occupied territories Gay Ethiopian journalist assaulted in horrifying attack About The Erasing 76 Crimes news site covers the human toll of 66+ countries’ anti-gay laws and the struggle to repeal them. Member Members of the African Human Rights Media Network publish news articles and other media that educate readers about sexual minorities’ struggle for recognition of their human rights. Partner The St. Paul’s Foundation for International Reconciliation promotes LGBTQ+ rights through fact-based advocacy journalism and community projects. (California charity 80-0647355) © 2026 Erasing 76crimes. All rights reserved. Scroll To Top Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate Facebook Twitter Instagram Discover more from Erasing 76 Crimes Subscribe now to keep reading and get access to the full archive. Type your email… Subscribe Continue reading PRESS ESC TO CLOSE