Ministry for Justice considers legislation to tackle ‘disgusting lurking homophobia’ Sun 27th Sep, 2026 Login to your account Remember Me Forgotten Password? Click here for help Not a member yet? You can register a free account and get 10 FREE premium articles a month. Forgotten Password? Reset your password To reset your password, please enter your email address in the box below and we will send you an email with a few steps to reset your password and get you back onto your account. Back To Login Home Local News Brexit UK/Spain News Features Sports Opinion & Analysis Subscribe E-Edition Local News Ministry for Justice considers legislation to tackle ‘disgusting lurking homophobia’ By Brian Reyes Share 22nd July 2021 The Ministry for Justice and Equality will “urgently” consider whether Gibraltar needs legislation to make it a specific crime to denigrate a person because of their sexual orientation. The move was revealed in Parliament by Chief Minister Fabian Picardo and comes against the backdrop of “disgusting lurking homophobia” on social media as a result of initiatives and events to mark Pride month earlier this year. “The Government will not accept the continued homophobia we are seeing,” Mr Picardo said. “The Government will therefore monitor whether it may be necessary to further bolster our legislation to make it a specific criminal offence to denigrate a person as a result of their sexual orientation.” “There can be no doubt that such behaviour is at the very least bullying of the worst sort.” “It may be that there is no choice but to also make it a specific criminal offence, and I am asking that our Ministry for Justice and Equality should urgently consider this.” “Homophobia, like racism, sexism and antisemitism, is not just the preserve of other continents,” he said. “It’s there is Europe. It’s there in Russia and in Hungary. But it will not be tolerated here.” Mr Picardo, who was praising the work of Equality Minister Samantha Sacramento after 10 years in the post, said Gibraltar had progressed immensely in recent years, including with laws on same sex marriage, IVF and surrogacy. He spoke highly too of Christian Santos, Gibraltar’s first openly-gay mayor who was demonstrating the value of diversity, and of Jonathan Pizarro, a Gibraltarian author who has written frankly and powerfully about “demons that lurked in the undergrowth” of this community and whey the “needed to be banished”. “Let us not for one moment believe that it is funny or clever to discriminate against a person for their sexual orientation,” Mr Picardo said. “Whilst I have breath in my body I will continue to ensure that we move only in one direction in this respect, forward.” “We have no reverse gear on rights and progress and neither does this community.” “I have a warning for those who would oppose us on these issues.” “The progressive road to equality is a one-way road.” “Anyone who stands against progress, anyone who stands against rights, anyone who is in favour of reversing the laws to prevent these discriminations needs to understand that they will have ferocious opposition from the majority to any such attempts.” Most Read Local News Bayside construction site fire extinguished, no injuries reported Wed 23rd Sep, 2026 Brexit Gibraltar seeks solution after residents wrongly registered on EES Thu 17th Sep, 2026 Local News Magistrate rejects Crown bid to remove Briton convicted under Terrorism Act Thu 24th Sep, 2026 Local News Gap-toothed Neanderthal child brought to life in new museum gallery Fri 15th May, 2026 Local News One Bayside fire probe examines rooftop construction materials Thu 24th Sep, 2026 E-Edition Today's Paper 22nd July 2021 Read our latest newspaper by downloading our app from the link below. Related Articles Local News Gibraltar Youth Service celebrates talent at ‘Time 2 Shine’ 27th September 2026 Local News Govt launches Public Service Mentorship Programme 26th September 2026 Local News Calpe House announces three new Trustees 26th September 2026 Local News Firefighters owed support and investment, not just praise, GSD says 25th September 2026 Contact Us Gibraltar Chronicle (Newspaper) Ltd, Watergate House, Line Wall Road, Gibraltar GX11 1AA. Tel: +350 200 47063 About Us The Gibraltar Chronicle is a daily newspaper published in Gibraltar since 1801. It is one of the world's oldest English language newspapers to have been in print continuously. Our print edition and e-paper is published daily except Sundays. The Gibraltar Chronicle (Newspaper) Ltd is licensed by the Gibraltar Government's Office of Fair Trading, licence number BL 152009. Subscriptions Register Privacy Policy © Copyright Gibraltar Chronicle 2026 Privacy & Cookies Policy Privacy Overview This website uses cookies to improve your experience while you navigate through the website. Out of these cookies, the cookies that are categorized as necessary are stored on your browser as they are essential for the working of basic functionalities of the website. We also use third-party cookies that help us analyze and understand how you use this website. These cookies will be stored in your browser only with your consent. You also have the option to opt-out of these cookies. But opting out of some of these cookies may have an effect on your browsing experience. Privacy Overview This website uses cookies to improve your experience while you navigate through the website. Out of these cookies, the cookies that are categorized as necessary are stored on your browser as they are essential for the working of basic functionalities of the website. We also use third-party cookies that help us analyze and understand how you use this website. These cookies will be stored in your browser only with your consent. You also have the option to opt-out of these cookies. But opting out of some of these cookies may have an effect on your browsing experience. Necessary Always Enabled Necessary cookies are absolutely essential for the website to function properly. This category only includes cookies that ensures basic functionalities and security features of the website. These cookies do not store any personal information. Non-necessary Non-necessary Any cookies that may not be particularly necessary for the website to function and is used specifically to collect user personal data via analytics, ads, other embedded contents are termed as non-necessary cookies. It is mandatory to procure user consent prior to running these cookies on your website.