Bermuda Senate approves bill prohibiting discrimination against gays - LGBTQ Nation Queerty : Culture Outsports : Sports GayCities : Travel LGBTQ Outpost : Shopping Login Become a Member Newsletter WhatsApp Facebook Instagram Twitter Threads Bluesky Menu Politics Good News Pride in Pictures Monthly Issue 🏳️‍🌈 100% LGBTQ+ Owned Politics Good News Pride in Pictures Monthly Issue Families Law & Policy Life Crime & Justice Arts & Media Commentary About Us Store Login Become a Member Part of the Q.Digital family of brands: Queerty GayCities INTO Outsports LGBTQ Outpost WhatsApp Facebook Instagram Twitter Threads Bluesky Bermuda Senate approves bill prohibiting discrimination against gays HAMILTON, Bermuda — Bermuda has passed legislation that will outlaw discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation. Associated Press July 4, 2013, 6:00 pm EDT· Updated on July 5, 2013 Share: HAMILTON, Bermuda — Bermuda has passed legislation that will outlaw discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation. The Human Rights Amendment Act was passed Wednesday without objection in Bermuda’s Senate, which gave the measure its final legislative approval. House lawmakers authorized the bill last month after hours of hot debate. The measure will amend a 30-year-old human rights act once it is signed by Bermuda’s governor. It also bans age discrimination in all sectors except at work. In recent weeks, Premier Craig Cannonier had urged parliamentarians to approve the amendments. He said the measure to outlaw discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation was “not about endorsing any kind of lifestyle” but was about preventing injustice. The wealthy British Atlantic territory of nearly 70,000 inhabitants does not permit same-sex marriage. [ap13] The Associated Press (AP) is one of the largest and most trusted sources of independent news gathering, committed to the highest standards of objective, accurate journalism. Associated Press text, photo, graphic, audio and/or video material shall not be published, broadcast, rewritten for broadcast or publication or redistributed directly or indirectly in any medium. Neither these AP materials nor any portion thereof may be stored in a computer except for personal and non-commercial use. Users may not download or reproduce a substantial portion of the AP material found on this web site. AP will not be held liable for any delays, inaccuracies, errors or omissions therefrom or in the transmission or delivery of all or any part thereof or for any damages arising from any of the foregoing. See more: Bermuda , Discrimination , LGBTQ protections , North America Related Boebert’s not a lesbian, Republican warns about “furry pilots” & drag star speaks truth to power A lifetime on the margins & a manslaughter case full of questions Hungarian gay couple trying to adopt for 5 years finally making headway under new government Help make LGBTQ Nation 1,500 Strong Independent LGBTQ+ journalism matters more than ever. This September, help us reach 1,500 members and keep LGBTQ+ stories, voices, and reporting available to millions of readers. $25 $50 $100 $150 Or give a different amount: $ $5/month $10/month $25/month $50/month $60/year $100/year $200/year $365/year We accept all major credit cards, Apple Pay, and Google Pay. 🏳️‍🌈 100% LGBTQ+ Owned ✔️ Always Free Journalism 🔒 Secure Payments ❌ Cancel Anytime Latest Law & Policy Blue-state hospitals are folding on trans youth care. Parents are wondering why they moved. In New York and other progressive states, providers are leaving transgender kids to fend for themselves. 4 minute read · 1790542800 Read Crime & Justice Trans woman & partner attacked by group of women driving by: “I want to know why.” The perpetrators pepper-sprayed the couple, and one yanked the trans woman by her hair. 2 minute read · 1790542800 Read Election News Texas Trump voters explain why they hate “morally corrupt” Ken Paxton: “People won’t vote for him” “Because [Republicans] picked him, they stand to lose the state.” 4 minute read · 1790535600 Read Commentary After 15 years in women’s prison, I realized I was a lesbian As I served a life sentence, I had given up on love. Then I met Paige. 10 minute read · 1790528400 Read Life Boebert’s not a lesbian, Republican warns about “furry pilots” & drag star speaks truth to power Here are the top stories of the week that you might have missed. 5 minute read · September 27, 2026 Read Life A lifetime on the margins & a manslaughter case full of questions Connor Schuyler fled anti-LGBTQ+ abuse as a child and survived homelessness, addiction and prison. Then he found himself in prison. 11 minute read · September 26, 2026 Read Life Hungarian gay couple trying to adopt for 5 years finally making headway under new government “We didn’t feel outright hostility, but when we first met social services it was clear they had an unspoken inclination.” 4 minute read · September 26, 2026 Read Commentary Don’t be fooled: The patriarchy is alive & fully functioning It’s so prevalent that it’s virtually invisible to some men and women alike. 8 minute read · September 26, 2026 Read Life “Legislation anxiety” is plaguing trans people nationwide There is “an environment of fear no matter where I go,” said one participant in a new study. 3 minute read · September 26, 2026 Read Life Anti-trans politician kicked out of public event after repeatedly misgendering his trans opponent PLUS: Dolly Parton’s encouraging advice and a drag king wants to be a castle’s witch! 3 minute read · September 26, 2026 Read Life Pete Hegseth is withholding pay from discharged trans soldiers. LGBTQ+ Dems are demanding answers. “This is unacceptable and appears to be another broken promise by this Administration.” 3 minute read · September 25, 2026 Read Politics “Disappointed and ashamed”: LGBTQ+ & ally groups slam Dem Rep. Marcy Kaptur’s anti-trans ads Democratic groups are urging her to change course. 5 minute read · September 25, 2026 Read Related See all Life Carrie Coon calls out high school for canceling LGBTQ+ play that students were rehearsing “The kids are not stupid. They knew that wasn’t the reason why.” 5 minute read · September 25, 2026 Read Life Gavin Newsom declares 9/25 “Dolly Parton Day” & WeHo is ready to celebrate “Be a diamond in a rhinestone world,” Newsom said. 4 minute read · September 23, 2026 Read Life Lesbian bar with a mountain of debt faces massive backlash for loosening masking requirement in 2026 The bar has been subject to toxic online criticism. “Just say you’re being complicit in a mass disabling event and get it over with.” 3 minute read · September 23, 2026 Read Life Most straight women don’t want to date bi guys, but most straight men are open to bi women The reasons people gave for not wanting to date bi partners show the lingering stigma of bi stereotypes. 3 minute read · September 22, 2026 Read Life Pro-trans voters call out Democrat, Vance insults drag nuns & Turkey cracks down on LGBTQ+ people Here are the top stories of the week that you might have missed. 5 minute read · September 20, 2026 Read Life Anti-LGBTQ+ MMA fighter wants to beat up Elliot Page “I’d beat the s**t out of him.” 3 minute read · September 19, 2026 Read Life A queer Torah study group is showing LGBTQ+ people they have always belonged in Judaism It’s all in how you look at things. 3 minute read · September 19, 2026 Read Life Students win big after school’s sneaky attempt to ban gay-straight alliance PLUS: Fall decorating tips and tasteful lesbian drama! 3 minute read · September 19, 2026 Read Life Milo Yiannopoulos’ Black husband accuses him of shocking racism, “enslavement” & abuse Yiannopoulos reportedly called his husband the n-word, told him to sleep in a basement, and threatened to kill him. 4 minute read · September 18, 2026 Read Life Power starts with showing up: Why Democracy & LGBTQ+ families need our votes this November Somebody should do something. And that somebody is all of us. 4 minute read · September 18, 2026 Read Life Open adoption can be complex, chaotic, & beautiful all at the same time. Just ask these two dads. “The relationship has to be built around the people involved, and that means making room for both connection and boundaries.” 8 minute read · September 16, 2026 Read Life The midterms will be a referendum on Donald Trump for LGBTQ Nation readers Readers expressed hope for the midterms: “Maybe then we can start dismantling what the administration has destroyed.” 2 minute read · September 16, 2026 Read Newsletter WhatsApp Facebook Instagram Twitter Threads Bluesky About Us Contact Us Privacy Policy AI Policy Terms of Service Privacy Notice for California Residents Monthly Issue © 2010 - 2026 LGBTQ Nation® | Proudly LGBTQ+ Owned and Operated 🏳️‍🌈 🏳️‍⚧️ LGBTQ Nation is a registered trademark of Q.Digital, Inc., registered in the state of California. $5/month $10/month $25/month $50/month $60/year $100/year $200/year $365/year We accept all major credit cards, Apple Pay, and Google Pay. 🏳️‍🌈 100% LGBTQ+ Owned ✔️ Always Free Journalism 🔒 Secure Payments ❌ Cancel Anytime