Trans Rights Index & Map 2025: Backsliding outpaces progress – Where Greece stands - The Press Project - Ειδήσεις, Αναλύσεις, Ραδιόφωνο, Τηλεόραση X ﻿ Πατήστε εδώ για να γίνετε συνδρομητής! Αν είστε ήδη Συνδεθείτε για να μη βλέπετε αυτό το μήνυμα X Συνδεθείτε μέσω TPP Community Έχετε συνδεθεί επιτυχώς Συνεχίζω εδώ Μεταφορά στο Community Username / Email Κωδικός ThePressProject powered by our community members Σύνδεση Εγγραφή TPP Community Αποσύνδεση Μετάβαση στο περιεχόμενο Newsroom Πολιτική Οικονομία Διεθνή Ρεπορτάζ Ανάλυση tpp. TV tpp. Radio Ανασκόπηση Πολιτισμός TPP International ΖΗΝ για τον Κώστα Support Newsroom Civil Rights English The Press Project Παρασκευή 16 Μαΐου 2025 Αναρτήθηκε: 10:38:07 Διαβάστε Ακόμα Greek Minister of Justice announces ban on surrogacy for male couples and changes to ministerial accountability law Orlando LGBT+ responds to Mitsotakis: “The prime minister of far-right arguments” ‘As long as prejudices hold fast, consciences do not change’: LGBTI+ advocate condemns brutal transphobic attack Trans Rights Index & Map 2025: Backsliding outpaces progress – Where Greece stands For the first time in the 13-year history of the organisation behind the Trans Rights Index & Map, the 2025 edition reveals that setbacks in trans rights now outweigh progress across Europe and Central Asia. Greece meets just 21 out of the 32 key indicators required for legal gender recognition and existing protections for trans people in asylum, hate crime/speech, non-discrimination, health, and family. Among the most pressing gaps are age restrictions on name changes, the lack of a national action plan, and the absence of legal recognition for trans and non-binary parenthood. The Press Project 16 Μαΐου 2025 | 10:38:07 Μοιράσου το Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Reddit The organisation’s social media statement highlights that “the regression of trans rights is more than a crisis solely for trans communities – it is a broader crisis of democracy and fundamental rights across the region. As trans people fight for autonomy over their bodies and identities, Europe struggles for its identity and sovereignty.” It also underscores the compounded forms of discrimination trans people face, particularly those marginalised further by race, class, disability, migration, HIV status, and other intersecting lived experiences, stating that their rights and fundamental freedoms stripped away at an aggressive pace. The Trans Rights Indew & Map examines and records the legal standing of trans people in 49 European countries and 5 in Central Asia. Where Greece stands Though Greece is not among the most repressive countries institutionally, it still lags significantly in protecting and supporting trans individuals. The current legal framework allows for legal gender recognition, and trans people can change their name, but only under specific conditions – particularly, an age limit still applies. That said, Greece does not require trans people to undergo: Psychological evaluation or diagnosis, Medical interventions or surgery, Sterilisation, Divorce in case of existing marriage. Furthermore, procedures for minors to change their legal gender do exist – an important but partial step forward. However, the country does not recognise non-binary identities. This means Greece fails to meet a fundamental criterion: the legal right to gender self-determination. There’s also no process in place for gender recognition of trans refugees, despite the fact that trans identity can be grounds for asylum. Protection a gainst d iscrimination: A m ixed b ag While Greece formally prohibits discrimination in employment, education, housing, healthcare, and access to goods and services, there are serious gaps in implementation. Crucially, Greece does not currently have a national action plan specifically targeting trans equality – a foundational element for meaningful change. The country does mandate the presence of an equality body, and gender expression is protected under anti-discrimination laws. However, without a structured plan to combat hatred, exclusion, and systemic inequality, many of these legal provisions remain underutilised or symbolic. Health and f amily r ights: Major g aps r emain In the health sector, Greece ticks one of two key boxes. So-called “conversion practices” – aimed at forcing individuals to change or suppress their gender identity – are prohibited . However, trans identities are not yet fully depathologised in the healthcare system. This means that being trans is still treated, in part, as a medical condition – a stance long criticised by international human rights bodies. Family rights are another area where Greece falls short. There is no legal recognition of trans or non-binary people as parents. This leaves many families in legal limbo and contributes to the systemic erasure of trans people in family law. Wider E uropean c ontext According to the report, only 33 countries currently ban discrimination in employment based on gender identity – down from 35 in 2024. A similar decline is seen in healthcare, where just 26 countries now offer legal protection, compared to 28 last year. Key figures at a glance: 29 countries protect trans people from discrimination in education (down from 31 in 2024). 28 countries ban discrimination in access to goods and services (2024: 30). 24 countries offer protection in housing (2024: 25). 30 countries mandate the presence of an equality body (2024: 31). 10 countries currently have a national action plan for trans equality – a figure unchanged from last year. 17 countries explicitly protect against discrimination based on gender expression. Meanwhile, only Iceland and Malta have fully depathologised trans identities. Just 10 countries explicitly ban so-called “conversion practices” aimed at altering or suppressing someone’s gender identity. 12 countries still require sterilisation for gender recognition, and only 19 have laws against hate speech targeting trans individuals. Greece is not among the worst performers, but the absence of progressive reforms means it continues to fall behind more inclusive countries. ______________________________________________ Are you seeking news from Greece presented from a progressive, non-mainstream perspective? Subscribe monthly or annually to support TPP International in delivering independent reporting in English. Don’t let Greek progressive voices fade. Make sure to reference “TPP International” and your order number as the reason for payment. Διαβάστε Ακόμα Greek Minister of Justice announces ban on surrogacy for male couples and changes to ministerial accountability law Orlando LGBT+ responds to Mitsotakis: “The prime minister of far-right arguments” ‘As long as prejudices hold fast, consciences do not change’: LGBTI+ advocate condemns brutal transphobic attack Μοιράσου το Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Reddit Σε χρειαζόμαστε Το ThePressProject είναι το μοναδικό μέσο ανεξάρτητης, ερευνητικής και αποκαλυπτικής δημοσιογραφίας που στηρίζεται αποκλειστικά στις μικρο-δωρεές των επισκεπτών του. Πιστεύουμε ότι η πληροφορία πρέπει να είναι διαθέσιμη σε όλους και για αυτό δεν κλειδώνουμε κανένα κομμάτι της ύλης αλλά για να παραχθεί το πρωτογενές υλικό που θα βρείτε εδώ χρειαζόμαστε την υποστήριξή σου. Αν δεν πληρώσουμε εμείς για την ενημέρωσή μας, θα την πληρώσει κάποιος άλλος (και αν δεν είσαι ο Μαρινάκης μάλλον δεν έχεις τα ίδια συμφέροντα). Μάθε πώς - Κάνε κλικ για να σχολιάσεις Πολιτική Σχολιασμού Στην κατηγορία Mitsotakis announces intervention on heating oil prices and allowance 21/09/2026 Prime Minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis has announced two government interventions following months of sustained fuel price increases. The first concerns measures, in cooperation with refineries, aimed at bringing the opening price… English Politics Εconomy Thousands march for 13th anniversary of Pavlos Fyssas’s murder 19/09/2026 Thirteen years have passed since the murder of anti-fascist musician Pavlos Fyssas, who was fatally stabbed in Keratsini on 18 September 2013 by Giorgos Roupakias, a member of the neo-Nazi… Civil Rights English Solidarity Ταυτότητα Πώς λειτουργούμε Eπικοινωνία TPP International Όροι Χρήσης Ανοίγοντας την Πρόσβαση στην Υγεία και το Φάρμακο για Όλους Support ThePressProject powered by our community members © 2026 ThePressProject | Created by BitsnBytes & re-manufactured by Sociality Διαχείριση Συγκατάθεσης Cookies Χρησιμοποιούμε cookies για να βελτιστοποιούμε τον ιστότοπό μας και τις υπηρεσίες μας. Λειτουργικά Λειτουργικά Πάντα ενεργό The technical storage or access is strictly necessary for the legitimate purpose of enabling the use of a specific service explicitly requested by the subscriber or user, or for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission of a communication over an electronic communications network. Προτιμήσεις Προτιμήσεις The technical storage or access is necessary for the legitimate purpose of storing preferences that are not requested by the subscriber or user. Στατιστικά Στατιστικά The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for statistical purposes. The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for anonymous statistical purposes. Without a subpoena, voluntary compliance on the part of your Internet Service Provider, or additional records from a third party, information stored or retrieved for this purpose alone cannot usually be used to identify you. Εμπορικής Προώθησης Εμπορικής Προώθησης The technical storage or access is required to create user profiles to send advertising, or to track the user on a website or across several websites for similar marketing purposes. Διαχείριση επιλογών Διαχείριση υπηρεσιών Manage {vendor_count} vendors Διαβάστε περισσότερα για αυτούς τους σκοπούς Αποδέχομαι Δεν Αποδέχομαι Προτιμήσεις Αποθήκευση προτιμήσεων Προτιμήσεις {title} {title} {title} Διαχείριση συγκατάθεσης