<<previous  |  index  |  next>>
IV. The extension of Shari’a to criminal law in Nigeria
The governor of the northern state of Zamfara, Ahmed Sani,
was the first to introduce Shari’a for criminal law, within a year of the 1999
elections which brought President Olusegun Obasanjo and new state governors to
power.  The Shari’a Establishment Law was introduced in Zamfara State on October 27, 1999, and came into force on January 27, 2000.  The introduction of Shari’a in Zamfara State attracted a huge amount of attention, and Ahmed Sani
became the self-appointed champion of Shari’a in Nigeria.
The Zamfara state governor had accurately judged the mood of
population. The introduction of Shari’a was initially very popular, for several
reasons. Foremost among these was public disenchantment with a government and a
legal system which were failing people in many respects.   There is widespread
poverty across Nigeria, and the north is especially underdeveloped.  There was
the expectation among the general public that Shari’a, with its emphasis on
welfare and the state’s responsibility to provide for the basic needs of the
population, would go some way towards alleviating their plight.  People also
felt frustrated with the law enforcement agencies and the judiciary:  crime was
increasing, yet the police and the courts were paralyzed by inefficiency and
corruption.  Shari’a was seen as an alternative to these problems, offering a
system which promised to be faster, less cumbersome, and less corrupt.
Finally, the introduction of Shari’a was no doubt attractive to many as a
re-affirmation of their religious identity, especially in the context of
recurring tensions between Muslims and Christians. 18
Capitalizing on the mood in Zamfara State, other state
governors soon introduced their own Shari’a legislation.  By 2002, twelve
states had adopted some form of Shari’a into their criminal legislation:
Bauchi, Borno, Gombe, Jigawa, Kaduna, Kano, Katsina, Kebbi, Niger, Sokoto, Yobe, and Zamfara.  These twelve states are so far the only states in Nigeria where Shari’a courts have the jurisdiction to try criminal cases. However, some
Muslims in other parts of the country, particularly in central and western
states, such as Nasarawa and Kwara, where there are large Muslim populations,
have been agitating for Shari’a to be introduced there; to date, these state
governors have resisted the pressure. However, in the southwestern state of
Oyo, it was reported that on October 31, 2002, a man was sentenced to flogging
for extra-marital sex and the punishment carried out, even though Shari’a is
not in force in the state.  He was sentenced not by a Shari’a court, but by an
Independent Shari’a Panel. 19
In all these twelve states, Shari’a applies only to
Muslims.  State governments have not attempted to coerce non-Muslims into being
tried by Shari’a courts.  However, non-Muslims are not prevented from accessing
the Shari’a jurisdictions and may choose to take cases through the Shari’a
courts if they wish.  Some have done so in the belief that their cases would be
treated faster, but overall, such cases are rare.  Normally, non-Muslims
accused of criminal offenses continue to be tried under the common law system
by magistrates’ or High Courts, which operate in parallel with the Shari’a
courts.  A third type of court, customary courts, also deal with cases of
non-Muslims in the south, as well as in Kaduna State. At the level of state
governments, the state attorney general is responsible for the operation of
both the common law and Shari’a systems in the state; there is also a Shari’a
section in each state ministry of justice.
Most of the twelve northern states have adopted a Shari’a
penal code and a Shari’a code of criminal procedure, based, in most cases, on
that of Zamfara State.  Some, such as Niger State, have opted to amend existing
legislation to make it comply with Shari’a and have not introduced a separate
Shari’a penal code or code of criminal procedure. 20   There is still
considerable confusion about which legislation is in force in the northern
states, even among judges, academics, and other people described as Shari’a
“experts.”  In any event, there is an overlap between the Penal Code for Northern Nigeria and the Shari’a laws, as the Penal Code includes elements of Islamic law
and provided the basis for whole sections of the Shari’a penal codes.  However,
there are some critical differences. In particular, the Shari’a codes contain
provisions for death by stoning and amputations which were not included in the
Penal Code.
In most cases, the Shari’a legislation was rushed through in
a hurried and incomplete way. A human rights activist and lawyer told Human
Rights Watch:  “Advocates of Shari’a wrote the laws in a few weeks.  The
authors knew they were imperfect but rushed them through for political
reasons.  Now they are gradually reviewing them […] They wanted to precipitate
a fait accompli.” 21
The former area courts were renamed Shari’a courts and judges who only had
experience in personal status law matters were suddenly expected to hear
criminal cases and, in the most serious instances, to try offenses punishable
with death.  They were thrown into this role with very little training or
background, with the result that many judgments handed down contained serious
errors of procedure.  Judgments were inconsistent and based on vastly different
interpretations of the law.  Even lawyers and academic scholars who had
specialized in studying Shari’a offered significantly different interpretations
of the new legislation.   Not only were the new Shari’a penal codes imperfect
and inconsistent, but some of them referred to prescriptions within Islam which
were not codified in the new laws but were nevertheless expected to be
enforced.  For example, several states’ Shari’a penal codes refer to offenses
which are not specified in the Shari’a penal codes themselves but are
punishable by imprisonment, flogging or fines. 22
The general population was even less well-prepared for the
introduction of an entirely new legal system, and ill-informed about the
procedures and about their rights.  Ordinary people have found it very
difficult to challenge decisions of the Shari’a courts, especially as judicial
officials, religious officials and others have often portrayed these as the
decisions of God rather than the decisions of judges―a view which has
discouraged many from openly questioning the outcome of trials.   Many Muslims
who are in favor of Shari’a but critical of the manner in which it was
introduced highlighted the failure of state government authorities to raise
awareness and educate the population before introducing the system. 23
Following the introduction of the new Shari’a legislation, most
state governments set up structures and groups to ensure the implementation of
Shari’a.  These structures included Shari’a implementation committees and
groups known as hisbah , whose main role was to ensure observance of
Shari’a among the population and to report any breaches.  The creation of the
hisbah was popular in some quarters because of a deep distrust in the Nigerian
federal police force, both among the general public and among state
politicians. 24
In several states, the hisbah have been used to carry out arrests, for example
in cases of suspected adultery or fornication, consumption of alcohol and other
offenses.   As described in this report, members of the hisbah have been
responsible for a range of human rights abuses in the course of enforcing
Shari’a, especially in the one to two years after they were set up.
Shari’a has been applied inconsistently across the twelve
states. The enthusiasm with which it has been enforced, both by the courts and
by the hisbah and other implementation groups, has also varied greatly,
depending on the religious make-up of the state and, to some extent, on the
political whims of state governors.   At the one end of the spectrum, Zamfara State has applied it the most strictly, although even there, the fervor has eased
off since it was first introduced.  At the other end of the spectrum, Kaduna
State, where about half the population of the state are Christians and where
the prospect of the introduction of Shari’a led to massive riots and killings
in 2000, 25
few criminal cases have been brought before the Shari’a courts, and with one or
two exceptions, harsh corporal sentences have not been passed.  A human rights
activist and academic in Kaduna told Human Rights Watch in mid-2003:  “In Kaduna, the Shari’a courts are there but they are as good as not there.  There has been no
serious case since the [2000 and 2002] riots.  They deal more with domestic
cases.” 26
A lawyer in Kaduna also said: “Generally, it is as if there is no Shari’a in Kaduna.” 27 Kaduna is divided into “Shari’a-compliant” and “non Shari’a-compliant” areas;  residents of
the former, predominantly Muslim areas, are expected to comply with the
requirements of Shari’a, whereas those of the predominantly non-Muslim or mixed
areas are not.  However, residents of Shari’a-compliant areas can simply cross
over into a non-Shari’a compliant area, where they can buy and consume alcohol
and where prostitution is common, then return to the Shari’a areas without any
consequences.  In the words of a human rights activist in Kaduna:  “Shari’a in Kaduna exists in one street but not in another.” 28
To a lesser extent, a similar situation has prevailed in Kano, at least in the state capital.  While predominantly Muslim, Kano State has a significant minority of other groups.  Alcohol has been sold openly in some areas,
for example in the area known as Sabon Gari which is populated mostly by people
who are neither Muslims nor northerners.  However, in May 2004, it was reported
that a new law outlawing the consumption of alcohol throughout Kano State, even for Christians, had been passed by the Kano State house of assembly.   Even in
states such as Zamfara, certain areas are designated as exempt from Shari’a.
These are mainly areas or institutions under the control of federal authorities,
such as military compounds.  In these areas, alcohol is consumed liberally and
openly, including by Muslims.  They are only liable to be arrested if caught
drinking alcohol outside these specific areas.
Shari’a courts and appeal procedures
There are three types of Shari’a courts dealing with
criminal cases at state level.  The lower and upper Shari’a courts (of which
there are several in each state) hear cases in the first instance.  Upper
Shari’a courts also have appellate jurisdiction and are able to hear appeals
from cases tried in the lower Shari’a courts.  Each state then has its own
Shari’a court of appeal, which hears appeals on cases tried by the upper
Shari’a courts.  Only one judge sits in the lower and upper Shari’a courts—a
cause for concern in the case of crimes which carry sentences such as the death
penalty or amputations.  Between three and five senior judges sit at the
Shari’a state court of appeal; these judges are generally more experienced than
those sitting in the upper and lower courts.
After being sentenced by the upper or lower Shari’a court,
the defendant is given a thirty day period in which to appeal.  In practice, a
number of appeals which were filed after the thirty day period had elapsed have
been accepted.
Once defendants have exhausted their avenues for appeal
within the state, and if the Shari’a court of appeal has confirmed the
sentence, they can then appeal to the Federal Court of Appeal, and ultimately
to the Supreme Court.   These are both federal institutions and are not Shari’a
courts, although they have jurisdiction to hear appeals from Shari’a courts and
their appeal panels are supposed to include judges with expertise and knowledge
of Shari’a.   Some advocates of Shari’a have complained about the absence of a
specialized Shari’a court of appeal at the federal level, arguing that the
judges of the Federal Court of Appeal and Supreme Court are not well-versed in
Shari’a;  some also fear, perhaps, that these institutions are too close to the
federal government, and therefore likely to be opposed to Shari’a.
If a death sentence or amputation is confirmed by a state’s
Shari’a court of appeal and the defendant chooses not to appeal to the Federal
Court of Appeal, the state governor must personally authorize the execution of
the punishment before it can take place, or can choose to pardon the convicted
person.
At the time of writing, no death penalty cases tried under
Shari’a have yet reached the Federal Court of Appeal or the Supreme Court.
Only one amputation sentence is known to have reached the level of the Federal
Court of Appeal:  that of Yahaya Kakale, from Kebbi State, described in this
report.   This will be a test case and, depending on the outcome of the appeal,
could set an important precedent for other cases.  Lawyers are hoping that this
case, and any other Shari’a case which reaches the federal level, will force
consideration of the broader question of the constitutionality of Shari’a (see
below).  Should the Federal Court of Appeal or the Supreme Court rule that the
Shari’a court did not have the jurisdiction to hear criminal cases under the
constitution, this and potentially all other cases could be thrown out, leading
to the collapse of the whole basis of the Shari’a criminal system in its
current form.
To date, lawyers preparing the grounds for appeals in
Shari’a cases have concentrated on technical and procedural matters.  Some of
these grounds have been accepted by the Shari’a state courts of appeal who have
ruled in favor of the defendants on the basis of these procedural points.  Most
lawyers have so far shied away from challenging the jurisdiction of the Shari’a
courts and their constitutional right to try criminal cases, so no court of
appeal has yet had to rule on these issues.
The role of the “ulama”
In parallel with the formal Shari’a court system, the ulama ,
or Islamic scholars, play a key role in some of the critical decisions in
Shari’a criminal cases.  In some cases, they may have the power of life and
death over the defendant.  The ulama , who play an influential role in
social and political life in northern Nigeria, are consulted for advice and
guidance by a number of actors, including Shari’a court judges and state
governors.  In the absence of any thorough training (see Section VII of this
report), Shari’a court judges often refer to the ulama for advice if
they are uncertain about the appropriate course of action.  State governors
also seek their advice on specific cases and expect to be guided by this
advice, particularly on cases of amputation and death sentences where the ulama
advise the governors on whether to confirm or commute the sentences. The advice
provided by the ulama is not based on clearly formulated criteria, nor
is it governed by any legislation or recognized regulatory framework.  The lack
of definition of the ulama ’s role and the lack of transparency about
their decisions also favor corruption.  A human rights activist told Human
Rights Watch:  “The role of the ulama varies.  It depends on who pays
them the best.” 29
Choice of courts
As indicated above, three different legal systems operate in
parallel in Nigeria:  the common law system (magistrates’ and High Courts),
Shari’a, and customary law.  In principle, cases against Muslims are normally
brought before Shari’a courts, but in practice, there is some discretion, and
apparently arbitrary decisions have been made as to which courts should handle
which cases.  Corruption is widespread within the judicial system, and there
are often no objective or consistent reasons why certain cases are brought
before a Shari’a court or a magistrates’ court.  Defendants are rarely able to
challenge the choice of system, yet the consequences in terms of sentencing
could be severe.   For example, Mohammed Bala, in Kano State, was accused of
theft on two separate occasions, in 2002 and 2003.  He was tried on the first
occasion by a Shari’a court and on the second occasion by a magistrates’ court.
The Shari’a court sentenced him to amputation, while the magistrates’ court
sentenced him to eighteen months’ imprisonment, or a 5,000 naira fine.  The
reason for the different choice of courts was not known to the defendant. 30   In Birnin
Kudu, Jigawa State, in around early 2002, several men accused of gang-raping a
young girl were tried under the common law system. It was reported that the
defendants’ relatives, who were influential in the society, had persuaded the
judicial authorities not to try them in a Shari’a court, even though all the
defendants were Muslims. 31
A number of defendants who were sentenced to amputation have
alleged that police and judicial officials were bribed or otherwise pressured
to take their cases before Shari’a courts.  For example, Altine Mohammed,
accused of theft in 2001 in Birnin Kebbi, Kebbi State, was initially taken to a
magistrates’ court; he pleaded not guilty and was sent on remand for two
weeks.  However, the grand kadi (judge), who owned the items he was accused of
stealing, reportedly requested that the case be transferred to the Shari’a
court.  Altine Mohammed witnessed the grand kadi’s messenger talking to a
policeman from the Criminal Investigation Department at the magistrates’
court.  When he asked the policeman why his case was being transferred to a
Shari’a court, the policeman said he would not tell him anything more unless he
gave him 3,000 naira.  The case was transferred to the Shari’a court.  During
the trial there, the grand kadi’s messenger was one of the witnesses, even
though he had not seen Altine Mohammed stealing the items and told the court
that he did not know him. 32
Altine Mohammed was sentenced to amputation by the Upper Shari’a Court 1,
Birnin Kebbi, on July 25, 2001.
According to a lawyer in Kaduna State, the state attorney
general decides which type of court should hear a case if the case is
especially serious or controversial, or if it is a “capital offense.” 33   He
explained that the state attorney general’s decision as to which type of court
should hear a case is entirely at his own discretion. 34 In other cases, the
decision is taken by the state commissioner of police. While Christians can
refuse to be tried by a Shari’a court, Muslims cannot.  The reasons for the
decisions are not always clearly articulated.  For example, while a number of
murder cases involving Muslim defendants have been brought before Shari’a
courts, others have been brought before magistrates’ courts.   Furthermore, as
indicated in this report, the police are often susceptible to pressure and
corruption, and in practice, the decision to take a case to a particular type
of court is often made at the lower levels of the judiciary.
In Zamfara State, however, in October 2002, a separate law
was passed removing the criminal jurisdiction of magistrates’ courts to try
offenses committed by Muslims, thus confirming the absence of choice for all
Muslim defendants:  “[…] magistrates courts of whatever grade shall cease to
have jurisdiction to try any criminal offence where the accused or all the
accused persons profess the Islamic faith.” 35   The law, initiated by the governor, was
passed by the state house of assembly without much debate or controversy.  As a
result of this law, all cases involving Muslims were transferred from the
magistrates’ courts to the Shari’a courts in Zamfara State.
[18]   Some of
the other political and economic factors which increased popular support for
Shari’a are described in Hussaini Abdu, “Power in the Name of Allah?  Muslim
Women in Contemporary Nigerian Politics,” presented at a national workshop on
Gender, Politics and Power, organized by the Centre for Social Science Research
and Development, July 29-30, 2003, Lagos.
[19]   See
“First flogging for adultery in southwest Nigeria,” Agence France-Presse, October 31, 2002, and “Man receives 100 strokes today under Shari’a in Oyo State,” The Vanguard (Lagos), October 31, 2002.  The Independent Shari’a Panel was established by Muslim groups, not by the state government, and does
not enjoy state recognition.  It sits in court premises and attends to civil
and personal cases voluntarily reported by offenders, parties in conflict, and
families.
[20] Some of
the differences between the Shari’a legislation adopted in different states are
outlined in “Legal pluralism and the development of the rule of law in Nigeria: Issues and challenges in the development and application of Shari’a,” by Dr Muhammed Tawfiq
Ladan of Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria.  The paper, which also lists the
different states’ legislation relating to Shari’a, was one of several presented
at a conference on “Shari’a penal and family laws in Nigeria and in the Muslim
world: a rights based approach,” organized by the International Human Rights
Law Group in Abuja on August 5-7, 2003.
[21] Human
Rights Watch interview, Abuja, July 21, 2003.   State governors subsequently
recognized that the Shari’a codes which had been adopted contained numerous
inconsistencies and errors.  As a result, in 2002, efforts began to harmonize
them and ensure consistency.  Shari’a experts at the Centre for Islamic Studies
and the Faculty of Law at Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria (Kaduna State), were among those tasked with this exercise.  Some state governments, such as Kano, also set up committees of Islamic scholars to review and perfect the state
legislation.  By mid-2004, the formal harmonization of codes had not yet been
completed.
[22] For
example Section 92 of the Zamfara State Shari’ah Penal Code Law 2000 states:
“Any act or omission which is not specifically mentioned in this Shari’a Penal
Code but is otherwise declared to be an offence under the Qur’an, Sunnah and Ijtihad
of the Maliki school of Islamic thought shall be an offence under this code and
such act or omission shall be punishable: a) With imprisonment for a term which
may extend to 5 years, or b) With caning which may extend to 50 lashes, or c)
With fine which may extend to N5,000.00 or with any two of the above
punishments.”
[23]   Human
Rights Watch interviews, Abuja and various locations in northern Nigeria, July and August 2003.
[24]   State
governments across Nigeria have been agitating for greater political and legal
autonomy for many years.  Some of them have been calling for state governments
to be able to create their own state police – a demand which the federal
government has resisted to date.
[25]   For
details of the 2000 and 2002 riots in Kaduna, see Human Rights Watch report
“The ‘Miss World riots:’ continued impunity for killings in Kaduna,” July 2003.
[26]   Human
Rights Watch interview, Kaduna, July 23, 2003.
[27]   Human
Rights Watch interview, Kaduna, July 24, 2003.
[28]   Human
Rights Watch interview, Abuja, July 23, 2003.
[29]   Human
Rights Watch interview, Abuja, July 18, 2003.
[30]   Human
Rights Watch interview, Goron Dutse Prison, Kano State, December 14, 2003.
[31]   Human
Rights Watch interview, Kano, July 30, 2003.
[32]   Human
Rights Watch interview, Kebbi Prison, Birnin Kebbi, December 17, 2003.
[33]   The
term “capital offense” is sometimes used in Nigeria to refer not only to
offenses which are punishable by death, but also to those punishable by other
harsh punishments, such as amputation.
[34]   Human
Rights Watch interview, Kaduna, July 24, 2003.
[35]   Section
3 of Magistrates Courts (Restriction of Powers) Law 2002.
<<previous  |  index  |  next>> September 2004