Introduction - Gender Identity and Sexual Identity in the Pacific and Hawai'i - Research Guides at University of Hawaii at Manoa Skip to Main Content UH Mānoa | UH System Libraries My Account MENU Services ▾ Borrow, Renew, Request How to borrow materials, request pdf scans, and interlibrary loans . Contact UH System Libraries Explore the Library Browse library spaces and locate collections by subject. Course Reserves How to access course-related materials reserved by faculty for their students. Graduate Research Carrels Policies, procedures and how to apply for research carrels at Hamilton Library. Lactation Room This room is for the exclusive use of nursing mothers affiliated with the University of Hawaii. Services for Faculty and Instructors A list of services offered to faculty and instructors at the University of Hawaii at Manoa. Library Instruction Request library instruction for your course or register for a workshop. Study Spaces Areas for individual and group study and how to reserve them. Technology in the Library Wireless access, scanning, printing, and loanable technology Suggest a Purchase Suggest new materials that support teaching, study, or research. Research ▾ Journals Search journals by title or subject. OneSearch Finds books and other materials in the UH Manoa Library's collection. Collections An overview of the various library collections. Research Guides Guides for subjects, select courses, and general information. Databases and More Search across 100s of library databases. Scholarly Communication Learn about scholarly communication, open access, and our institutional repositories ScholarSpace , eVols , and the UH System Repository . Help ▾ Accessibility and Disability Information about accessibility and disability. Ask Us Get help by email, online form, or phone. Request a Research Appointment Contact us to schedule an in-person appointment. Copyright Links to resources about copyright. Subject Librarians Find a librarian for a specific subject. FAQ Frequently asked questions. Learning and Research Skills Video tutorials for learning and research skills. Library Essentials The starting point for your research About ▾ Visiting the Library Directions, parking, and other visitor info. News, Blogs & Events News , blogs & events from the library. Exhibits Current and past exhibits at the library. Office and Department Contacts View a list of the departments at the library. Floor Plans Interactive maps of the library. Our Library Annual reports, mission, values, history, and policies. Hours Building and department hours Staff Directory Contact information for staff at the library. Jobs at the Library Faculty, staff, and student job opportunities. Giving to the Library Find out how you can support the library. ILL Give Library Research Guides Gender Identity and Sexual Identity in the Pacific and Hawai'i Introduction Search this Guide Search Gender Identity and Sexual Identity in the Pacific and Hawai'i: Introduction Information about gender identity and sexual identity in the Pacific island region, including Hawai'i. Provides suggested resources and search strategies. Introduction Select Resources Research Tools & Strategies Library Information Identity Taualuga: The Last Dance. Shigeyuki Kihara in solo performance at the 4th Asia-Pacific Triennial of Contemporary Art, Queensland Art Gallery, Brisbane, Australia, 2003. Photo by Lukas Davidson. Acknowledgements This guide was originally created by Eleanor Kleiber (UHM Pacific specialist librarian) and D. Kealiʻi MacKenzie, during his internship with the UHM Hawaiian and Pacific Collection in 2012. Introduction There are diverse and constantly shifting expressions of gender identity and sexual identity in the Pacific island region. Identity expressions that would be defined as homosexual or transgendered using western vocabulary often fulfilled important and well-established cultural or ritual functions within various parts of the Pacific. Contact with Europeans and the subsequent colonization of the region often resulted in rejection or suppression of these identities. More recently these identities are being reclaimed and redefined, responding to both traditional and external influences and expectations. Much of what exists on these topics has been written by historians, anthropologists, and ethnographers not from the region. While these observations are invaluable, we are lucky to be in a time when Queer Pacific People have begun to tell their own stories and histories. This library guide serves as a launching point for researchers, artists, writers, scholars, and students interested in gender identity and sexual identity in the Pacific island region. Of particular interest are some of the terms for alternative genders and sexual expression. The Hawaiian and Pacific collections provide access to books, magazines, journals, newspapers, music, film, as well as rare and archival materials. The librarians in the Hawaiian and Pacific collections can offer search strategies as well as connect you to other resources for research purposes. Pacific gender/sexual identity organizations Association Diversités NC (New Caledonia) La mission principale de l’association est d’œuvrer pour l’inclusion des diversités sexuelles, d’identités de genre et des pluralités familiales à l’échelle du territoire calédonien. Drodrolagi Movement (Fiji) Drodrolagi is the Fijian word for rainbow and rainbow is a symbol for diversity and pride. droMo is a group that accepts and celebrates diversity in all forms, whether it is in race, colour, religion, interests, sexual orientation and gender identity. In acknowledging our diversity as people of the South Pacific we also acknowledge the often marginalised groups who face stigma, bullying, ridiculing, violence and discrimination on the grounds of their sexual orientation and gender identity. GALA (Guam) A community based organization in Guam founded in 2008. We exist to strengthen the quality of life for gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgender, queer and intersex persons, their families and friends through support, education and advocacy. We uphold a society that embraces social diversity through love and respect for all. Guam Pride ISA Guahan ISA Guahan is an LGBTQ newsletter and network for the LGBTQ community on Guam. One Love Oceania (OLO) OLO (One Love Oceania) is a queer, Pacific Islander women's support, art and activist organization based in the Bay Area. OLO consists of trailblazing queer women of Melanesian, Micronesian and Polynesian descent who explore the complexities and intersections of gender, sexualities, class, race, colonialisms, resistance movements, and Pacific Islander diasporic histories through muti-medium performances that fuse dance, music, film, theater and poetry. Pacific Sexual Diversity Network (PSDN) The PSDN is a regional network of Pacific MSM and Transgender organisations whose mission is to strengthen community leadership, mobilisation and advocacy in the areas of sexuality and gender identities with respect to sexual health including STIs and HIV and AIDS, well being and Human Rights. Puka Mai Ke Koʻa (Hawaiʻi) Puka Mai Ke Koʻa explores Kanaka worldview and themes of decolonization to examine the way power imbalances and settler colonialism manifest in LGBTQ+ discourse. The goal is to construct clearer paths towards connection, healing, and liberation in our community here in Hawaiʻi. S.O.F.I.A.S. (American Samoa) In 2010 the American Samoa Island Queens Association and the American 7s Association merged to become the Society of Fa’afafine in American Samoa (SOFIAS). “A name change was also summoned so to align the association with the new union and also with the current trend within the region - whereby, indigenous people be proud of their cultural identity and for us - we are fa'afafine Samoa.” Samoa Fa'afafine Association A non-profit incorporated society set up to promote the rights & interests of fa'afafines and fa'afatamas in Samoa. Te Tiare Association (Cook Islands) This link opens in a new window Te Tiare Assocation is the only group set up to work for and on behalf of Gay, MSM, Transgender and Akavaine here in the Cook Islands. Tonga Leitis Association (Tonga) The Tonga Leitis’ Association (TLA) was established in 1992 with a focus of improving the rights, and celebrating the contribution, of Leitis in Tonga. U.T.O.P.I.A. United Territories Of Pacific Islanders' Alliance (United States) U.T.O.P.I.A. originated in San Francisco, California in March 1998. The organization was formed to provide support to the Polynesian Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual, andTransgender community. Originally, the group identified themselves as GPAC (Gay Polynesians Alliance/California). In February 1999, the name was changed to UTOPIA. The new name was better suited to represent the diversity of the club. UTOPIA has been a support organization for GLBT Polynesians and friends consisting of members from Samoa, Tonga, Hawaiʻi , Tahiti and Fiji. UTOPIA hopes to strengthen its alliance by recruiting members from all of Polynesia and South Pacific. U.T.O.P.I.A. - San Diego This link opens in a new window U.T.O.P.I.A. San Diego's mission is to provide Unity and Strength amongst our Pacific Islander (Melanesia, Micronesia & Polynesia) and LGBTQIA (Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer, Intersex & Ally) communities. U.T.O.P.I.A. - San Francisco This link opens in a new window A social LGBT group for our Pacific Islander families, friends and supporters. We are of many colors and embrace many different cultures that make up the diversity of San Francisco. U.T.O.P.I.A. - Washington This link opens in a new window United Territories of Pacific Islanders Alliance Washington (UTOPIA Washington) is a queer and trans people of color-led, grassroots organization born out of the struggles, challenges, strength, and resilience of the Queer and Trans Pacific Islander (QTPI – “Q-T-pie”) communities. Definitions This is a list of terms from the Pacific region. These terms do not always have direct equivalencies with English terms. The usage of these terms are evolving and their meaning may differ depending on the person. Linked to Homosaurus term when available. Aikāne ( Hawaiʻi ) in Native Hawaiian culture an aikane was an intimate same-sex friend of a chief. This person often, though not always, had a sexual relationship with the chief as well. Akatāne / Akatututane (Cook Islands) Cook Islands Māori "tomboy", or to act like a man. more... less... In Buse and Taringa's 1995 and 1996 Cook Islands Maori Dictionary, and found on www.psgdn.org/cookislands in 2023. Akavaʻine (Cook Islands) This link opens in a new window In Cook Islands Māori to behave like a woman. more... less... In Buse and Taringa's 1995 and 1996 Cook Islands Maori Dictionary, and in Mauriati et al. 2006 Reo Mangaia i te Reo Papa'a = Mangaia Dialect to English Dictionary. Faʻafafine (Samoa) A recognized and integral part of traditional Samoan culture, Faʻafafine , are born male, but embody both male and female gender traits. Faʻafatama (Samoa) This link opens in a new window Contemporary Samoan word for a woman who identifies as a lesbian. Fafafine (Niue) In Niuean culture an individual born male but embodies both male and female gender traits. Fakaleiti / Fakeleti / Fakalati / Fakafefine (Tonga) in Tongan culture a male who behaves in the manner of a woman. Similar to māhū , faʻafafine , and raerae. Kakōl (Marshall Islands) A male who behaves or dresses in the manner of a woman and lives and functions socially among women and in the world of women. more... less... In "Teaching Oceania Series, Gender in the Pacific" (http://hdl.handle.net/10125/42433). Māhū ( Hawaiʻi and Tahiti) This link opens in a new window An individual with characteristics of both sexes, usually a male to female, who often holds spiritual roles. In contemporary Hawaiʻi the word is also used to describe people who are transgender, or gay. Māhūkāne (Hawaiʻi) A wahine who lives the life of a kane , mentally and/or physically. A term coined by the Kānaka Maoli (Native Hawaiian) queer community in the early 2000s. Māhūwahine (Hawaiʻi) A kāne who lives the life of a wahine, mentally and/or physically. A term coined by the Kānaka Maoli queer community in the early 2000s. Mamflorita / Palao'åna (Guam) This link opens in a new window CHamoru words that refer to a person born male but who embodies the appearance of and behaviors common to females. more... less... In "Teaching Oceania Series, Gender in the Pacific" (http://hdl.handle.net/10125/42433). Manmalalahi (Guam) Manmalao’an (Guam) Mengol a otaor (Palau) a phrase for homosexual. Moe aikāne ( Hawaiʻi ) an individual who slept with another individual, both of the same sex or gender. MVPFAFF+ (Oceania) Acronym used to describe Pasifika/Pacific Islander gender diverse identities as a group. The acronym includes Māhū (Hawai'i and Tahiti), Vaka sa lewa lewa (Fiji), Palopa (Papua New Guinea), Fa’afafine (Samoa), Akava’ine (Rarotonga), Fakaleitī (Tonga), Fakafifine (Niue), and more. Coined by Phylesha Brown-Acton in 2011. Palopa (Papua New Guinea) Tok Pisin term for individuals who are openly effeminate. Neologism derived from "Jennifer Lopez," used around 2005-2009. more... less... Christine Steward, on page 327 in Besnier's 2014 "Gender on the edge." Pinapinaaine / Binabinaaine (Tuvalu and Kiribati) a man who might regard himself as, or be regarded by others as a woman. Raerae / Māhūvahine (Tahiti) In Tahiti this refers to an individual who is male but identifies and lives as a female. Other terms for māhū . Sistagirls / Sister-Girl (Torres Strait and Papua New Guinea) A term to describe people who transition from male to female. more... less... Christine Steward, on page 327 in Besnier's 2014 "Gender on the edge." Takatāpui ( Māori ) This link opens in a new window A devoted partner of the same sex, in contemporary Aotearoa it has become an umbrella term for Māori LGBTQ+ people. Vaka sa lewa lewa (Fiji) in Fijian culture this refers men who may present themselves, or live their lives as women. Whakatane ( Māori ) In Māori culture this term is used to describe people assigned female at birth who pursue traditionally male roles. Whakawāhine ( Māori ) This link opens in a new window In Māori culture this term is used to described people assigned male at birth who pursue traditionally female roles. Wininmvan (Chuuk) a word for homosexual. Next: Select Resources >> Last Updated: Jul 23, 2026 9:26 AM URL: https://guides.library.manoa.hawaii.edu/Pacificsexualidentity Print Page Staff Login Subjects: Hawaii Pacific Tags: hawaii pacific Resources Research Guides Databases e-Journals Interlibrary Loan Loanable Technology Devices Teaching Resources Support Learning Skills Study Spaces Ask A Librarian Visiting the Library Contact Hamilton Library 2550 McCarthy Mall Honolulu, HI 96822 Ref: (808) 956-7214 Circ: (808) 956-7203 Contact Us Giving to the Library Copyright Policy UH Usage Policy Terms of Use Equal Opportunity Library Staff Links © University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa Library.