Support The Moscow Times!
Contribute today
My account
Signout
×
Sections
Home
Ukraine War
News
Opinion
Business
Arts and Life
Regions
Podcasts
Galleries
Newsletters
TMT Lecture Series
Archive
Multimedia projects
Mothers & Daughters
Generation P
News
Ukraine War
Regions
Business
Opinion
Arts & Life
Podcasts
Archive
RU
My account
Signout
Support The Moscow Times!
Contribute today
Russia Issues First Prison Sentence for ‘LGBT Extremism’
Feb. 19, 2025
Martina Martinez / pexels
A court in Siberia handed down Russia’s first-ever prison sentence under the country’s ban on the so-called “international LGBT movement,” the independent news website Mediazona reported Wednesday.
Russia’s Supreme Court outlawed the “international LGBT movement” as an “extremist” organization in November 2023, adding it to the country’s lists of terrorist and banned organizations.
On Jan. 30, the Yaysky District Court in the Kemerovo region convicted an unnamed individual of “LGBT extremism,” sentencing them to six years in a maximum-security prison, according to Mediazona.
The individual was already serving an 18-year sentence for child sex abuse, and the court combined the penalties into a total sentence of 15 years.
“While serving the sentence, the resident of the town of Guryevsk… involved Russian citizens in the activities of the ‘international LGBT movement’ extremist organization,” state media quoted the regional Federal Security Service (FSB) office as saying Wednesday.
LGBTQ+ rights in Russia have steadily eroded since President Vladimir Putin signed a law banning “LGBT propaganda” toward minors in 2013.
Read more about:
LGBT
Sign up for our free weekly newsletter
Our weekly newsletter contains a hand-picked selection of news, features, analysis and more from The Moscow Times. You will receive it in your mailbox every Friday. Never miss the latest news from Russia. Preview
Subscribe
Subscribers agree to the Privacy Policy
We sent a confirmation to your email. Please confirm your subscription.
A Message from The Moscow Times:
Dear readers,
We are facing unprecedented challenges. Russia's Prosecutor General's Office has designated The Moscow Times as an "undesirable" organization, criminalizing our work and putting our staff at risk of prosecution. This follows our earlier unjust labeling as a "foreign agent."
These actions are direct attempts to silence independent journalism in Russia. The authorities claim our work "discredits the decisions of the Russian leadership." We see things differently: we strive to provide accurate, unbiased reporting on Russia.
We, the journalists of The Moscow Times, refuse to be silenced. But to continue our work, we need your help .
Your support, no matter how small, makes a world of difference. If you can, please support us monthly starting from just $ 2. It's quick to set up, and every contribution makes a significant impact.
By supporting The Moscow Times, you're defending open, independent journalism in the face of repression. Thank you for standing with us.
Once
Monthly
Annual
Continue
Not ready to support today? Remind me later .
×
Remind me next month
Remind me
Thank you! Your reminder is set.
We will send you one reminder email a month from now. For details on the personal data we collect and how it is used, please see our Privacy Policy .
Most read
Just in
Sep. 25, 2026
Here's How We Know Russia's Elections Were Fixed
Sep. 25, 2026
Evan Gershkovich Says His Arrest in Russia Was Carefully Planned FSB Sting
Sep. 25, 2026
Russia Can Restart 80% of Black Sea Grain Export Terminals if Attacks Stop – Analysis
Sep. 25, 2026
St. Petersburg Courts and Moscow Universities Evacuate Following Bomb Threats
Sep. 25, 2026
U.S. Proposed New Round of Ukraine Peace Talks in UAE, Zelensky Says
Sep. 25, 2026
Moscow Police Arrest Political Expert Alexander Kynev on Drug Charges
Sep. 25, 2026
United Russia Wins Record State Duma Majority in Elections Dubbed as Most Uncompetitive in Modern History
1
Kremlin Weighs U.S. Invitation for Putin to Attend G20 Summit in Miami
2
Belarus Claims It Foiled ‘Sabotage’ Plot Targeting Russia
3
Krasnodar Region Declares State of Emergency as Ukrainian Strikes Cripple Grain Exports
4
Finance Ministry Unveils 2027 Budget Draft With Fresh Tax Hikes to Fund War Deficit
5
State Duma Creates New AI Oversight Committee
Read more
Russian Movie Portal Charged With ‘LGBT Propaganda’ – Reports
Kinopoisk, which has more than 150 million monthly visitors, faces up to $47,500 in fines or a three-month suspension of operations.
2 Min read
Russian Lawmakers Vote to Ban Gender Reassignment
The bill seeks to ban "medical interventions aimed at changing the sex of a person" and "the state registration of a change of gender without an operation...
2 Min read
Russia Fines Streaming Platform Under ‘LGBT Propaganda’ Law
Trikolor Kino i TV is the first streaming platform to be fined under Russia's expanded anti-LGBT law.
2 Min read
Russian Court Rules to Deport Chinese LGBT Blogger
Haoyang Xu and his partner, who is a Russian citizen, chronicled their life as an openly gay couple on their popular social media pages.
1 Min read
The Moscow Times
About us
Privacy Policy
Privacy Manager
Podcasts
Videos
Galleries
Newsletters
Archive
Follow us
Media Partners
bne IntelliNews
Belarusian Investigative Center
Euractiv
© The Moscow Times, all rights reserved.