The Decade-Long Evolution of Latin America's Homicide Rates Close About Us Our Impact Newsletters Donate Sign In Search for: Search Investigations News Analysis Open dropdown menu News Analysis Special Series Countries Criminal Profiles Criminal Dynamics English Español Facebook Page Twitter Username Linkedin YouTube Instagram English Español Investigations News Analysis Special Series Multimedia Audio About Us Work With Us Events Countries: Mexico Colombia Guatemala Honduras El Salvador See All Topics: Criminal Profiles Criminal Dynamics Public Policy Other InSight Resources Venezuela Organized Crime Observatory Please Support Our Mission: Donate LinkedIn Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram Close English Español Investigations News Analysis Special Series Multimedia Audio About Us Work With Us Events Countries: Mexico Colombia Guatemala Honduras El Salvador See All Topics: Criminal Profiles Criminal Dynamics Public Policy Other InSight Resources Venezuela Organized Crime Observatory Please Support Our Mission: Donate LinkedIn Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram Skip to content Menu InSight Crime INVESTIGATION AND ANALYSIS OF ORGANIZED CRIME About Us Our Impact Newsletters Donate Sign In Menu Sign In Investigations News Analysis Open dropdown menu News Analysis Special Series Countries Criminal Profiles Criminal Dynamics English Español Open Search Search for: Search Posted in News Mexico The Decade-Long Evolution of Latin America’s Homicide Rates by Juliana Manjarrés , Christopher Newton and Marina Cavalari 24 Apr 2025 25 Feb 2026 Share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window) LinkedIn Share on X (Opens in new window) X Share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) WhatsApp Organized crime — particularly cocaine trafficking — has been the main driver of homicides in Latin America and the Caribbean over the last decade, according to data compiled by InSight Crime. While the regional homicide rate has remained relatively stable, some countries have seen worrying increases, while others have experienced significant declines. In the Caribbean, the average homicide rate rose by 18.9%, while in Central America and Mexico it dropped by 58%, and in South America it fell by 22.6%. The data, collected by InSight Crime over the past decade, illustrates how criminal dynamics have shaped violence patterns in the region as well as the challenges of accurately measuring those changes. Here, InSight Crime highlights some of the most important trends. Caribbean The Caribbean was the only subregion where the average homicide rate increased over the last 10 years, rising by 18.9%.* Although most countries saw a drop in homicide rates during this period, surges in Suriname (+406.7%), Saint Lucia (+151.7%), and Saint Kitts and Nevis (+6.7%) pushed the regional average higher. Despite remaining a key transit point for cocaine bound for Europe and the United States, the violence spike in the Caribbean has not been directly driven by trafficking networks. In Suriname, for example, the increase is linked to the growing use of firearms in petty crimes such as robbery. In Saint Lucia and Saint Kitts and Nevis, by contrast, the trend is tied to violent turf wars among local gangs and the fragmentation of these groups. You Trust our Reporting, We Need Your Support. With a regular donation from $50, or a single donation from $15, you can have access to exclusive benefits. Your support is crucial for us to keep doing what we do. Donate Now I’m already a donor Usted confia en nuestro periodismo, nosotros confiamos en su apoyo. Con una donación recurrente desde US$50 o una donación única desde US$15, podrá acceder a beneficios exclusivos. Su apoyo es fundamental para seguir investigando y analizando el crimen organizado en América Latina y el Caribe. Donar ahora Ya so y donante Central America and Mexico Central America and Mexico saw the sharpest drop in homicide rates of all monitored subregions, with a 58% decline from 38.2 per 100,000 inhabitants in 2015 to 16.3 in 2024. No country in Latin America and the Caribbean experienced a more drastic drop than El Salvador, where the homicide rate plummeted by 98%. SEE ALSO: InSight Crime’s 2024 Homicide Round-Up El Salvador’s drop from 107 per 100,000 in 2015 to just 1.9 in 2024 significantly pulled down the regional average. Without El Salvador’s shift, the drop for Central America and Mexico would have been just 13%. Homicide Figures Rarely Tell the Full Story Help us continue investigating the criminal economies and networks driving violence across the Americas Become an annual donor Support our work from US$15 Las cifras de homicidios solo muestran una parte de la historia Ayúdenos a seguir investigando las economías criminales y las redes detrás de la violencia en América Latina y el Caribe Conviértase en donante anual Haga una donación desde 15 dólares Honduras, Guatemala, and Belize also saw substantial decreases over the decade, with reductions of 58%, 48%, and 35%, respectively. But this was not the case across the board. In Costa Rica, increased cocaine trafficking through its ports drove a 44% spike in homicides. In Mexico, the rate rose 13.5% due to disputes over control of drug and migrant smuggling routes. Panama experienced a mild 4% increase tied to local gang rivalries. Changes in the average rate reflect national dynamics, but do not necessarily mean fewer homicides occurred overall in 2024 than in 2015. El Salvador, which has a population of around 6 million, could see its homicide rate drop from 33.2 to 16.7 if killings fall from 2,000 to 1,000. But in Mexico, a jump from 16.7 to 33.2 would mean homicides increased from about 22,094 to 43,924 — far more significant in absolute terms. Still, El Salvador’s drop in violence has been dramatic. It is largely attributed to the dismantling of the MS13 and two rival Barrio 18 factions under President Nayib Bukele. The country had one of the highest homicide rates in the world in 2015 due to gang turf wars. Bukele’s hardline policies, however, have drawn criticism for suspending certain civil rights and mass arrests of alleged gang members currently being held in a maximum-security mega-prison. SEE ALSO: Did El Salvador’s Gang Truce Lead to More Violence? Bukele’s tough-on-crime approach may have shown short-term results, but part of the homicide rate decline is also tied to a change in El Salvador’s recording methodology. In 2019, the National Police said it would stop including deaths from clashes between security forces and alleged gang members, as well as bodies found in mass graves. That year, the homicide rate dropped from 53 to 38 per 100,000. Guatemala also saw a steady decline in its homicide rate between 2009 and 2021. The government credits targeted operations in high-crime provinces aimed not only at reducing killings, but also dismantling criminal groups and tackling extortion. South America South America’s average homicide rate declined by 22.6% over the last decade. However, some countries saw upward trends despite having declared states of emergency to combat crime, raising fresh doubts about the effectiveness of such measures. Governments in Ecuador and Chile adopted these measures to contain violence tied to organized crime, but both saw steep increases in their homicide rates. From 2015 to 2024, Ecuador’s rose by 546.7% and Chile’s by 139.1%. Ecuador’s rise is linked to its emergence as a major cocaine trafficking hub and the explosive proliferation of criminal groups operating in the sector. SEE ALSO: Massacres Surge as Gangs Atomize in Ecuador By 2023, the city of Durán had become Ecuador’s crime epicenter, with a homicide rate more than three times the national average. The militarization of the government’s war on gangs in early 2024 further fragmented criminal groups, fueling more violence. In Chile, the expansion of foreign gangs like the Tren de Aragua contributed to the growth of organized crime. While other offenses have declined over the past decade, those tied to organized crime have risen, straining the country’s prison system. Still, Chile maintains one of the lowest homicide rates in the region. Despite recent violence in some countries, seven out of the ten analyzed in South America saw declining trends — including Venezuela, with a 70.8% drop, and Argentina, with a 42.4% decrease. Though data from countries like Venezuela, Bolivia, and Paraguay are unreliable, their downward trends contributed to the overall regional decline. * The regional average refers to the sum of each country’s homicide rates divided by the number of countries, not the total number of homicides divided by the total population. Tagged: Argentina , Belize , Caribbean , Chile , Costa Rica , DataInSights , Ecuador , El Salvador , Guatemala , Homicides , Honduras , Infographics , Mexico , Suriname , Venezuela Related Content InSight Crime’s 2025 Homicide Round-Up Date 11 Mar 2026 InSight Crime’s 2024 Homicide Round-Up Date 26 Feb 2025 Organized Crime Blamed for Half of Latin America’s Homicides Date 22 Dec 2023 Stay Informed With InSight Crime Subscribe to our newsletter to receive a weekly digest of the latest organized crime news and stay up-to-date on major events, trends, and criminal dynamics from across the region. Sign up Donate today to empower research and analysis about organized crime in Latin America and the Caribbean, from the ground up. Donate We go into the field to interview, report , and investigate. We then verify, write, and edit, providing the tools to generate real impact. Our work is costly and high risk. Please support our mission investigating organized crime. Donate About Us Work With Us Investigations Latest News Analysis Special Series Multimedia Audio Events Countries Criminal Dynamics Public Policy Criminal Profiles Information Processing Policies Privacy policy Refund policy Contact us Sponsored by Member of © 2026 InSight Crime Powered by Newspack Facebook Page Twitter Username Linkedin YouTube Instagram We Go Deep on Organized Crime and Need You to Keep Donating Thank you for being here and trusting our work. If you find it valuable, we hope you'll consider becoming an annual donor. In return, you will get access to exclusive benefits and a one-on-one meeting with our directors or experts. Explore options I’m already an annual donor Investigamos el crimen organizado a fondo. Necesitamos su apoyo para continuar. Gracias por estar aquí y confiar en nuestro trabajo. Si considera valioso lo que hacemos, le invitamos a convertirse en donante anual. Su apoyo le dará acceso a beneficios exclusivos y a una reunión con nuestros directores o expertos. Convertirme en donante Ya soy donante Come Behind Closed Doors with InSight Crime September 29, October 1, and 2, 2026 · Online A week of private conversations on organized crime in the Americas. One pass, three events exploring Venezuela's criminal landscape, the fentanyl crisis, and how to work with data to investigate organized crime. Get a pass for US$30 until September 15, then US$ 45 . Get your pass Learn more * If you are an annual donor, you will receive the invitation via email. No se pierda nuestro primer Behind Closed Doors con InSight Crime 29 de septiembre, 1 y 2 de octubre de 2026 · En linea Una semana de conversaciones exclusivas sobre el crimen organizado en las Américas. Tres eventos en línea, un solo pase semanal: explore el panorama criminal de Venezuela, conozca más sobre la crisis del fentanilo y descubra cómo utilizar datos para investigar el crimen organizado. Obtenga su pase Más información *Si usted es donante anual, recibirá la invitación por correo electrónico. Over 21,000 professionals trust InSight Crime for expert analysis on organized crime in Latin America Join our network of thought leaders, decision makers, and change drivers taking on organized crime in Latin America by subscribing to our free weekly newsletter. Subscribe now Más de 21.000 profesionales confían en InSight Crime para obtener análisis especializados sobre el crimen organizado en América Latina Únase a nuestra red de líderes de opinión, tomadores de decisiones y agentes de cambio que enfrentan el crimen organizado en América Latina suscribiéndose a nuestro boletín semanal gratuito. Suscríbase ahora Sign in or register Close Continue with Google Or Enter the code sent to your email Email address Enter your password Sign in by entering the code we sent to , or clicking the magic link in the email. Continue Resend code Email me a one-time code instead Forgot password Go back Continue Set a password (optional) Refund Policy . This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply. Verify your email Close We'll send a verification code to %EMAIL% . Send code Skip for now Gift this article Close Link Copy link Manage Consent At InSight Crime, we use cookies to understand how readers engage with our content, and to improve what we publish. We never use this data to sell your information. You can accept or decline at any time. If you say no, some features may be limited. Functional Functional Always active The technical storage or access is strictly necessary for the legitimate purpose of enabling the use of a specific service explicitly requested by the subscriber or user, or for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission of a communication over an electronic communications network. Preferences Preferences The technical storage or access is necessary for the legitimate purpose of storing preferences that are not requested by the subscriber or user. Statistics Statistics The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for statistical purposes. The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for anonymous statistical purposes. Without a subpoena, voluntary compliance on the part of your Internet Service Provider, or additional records from a third party, information stored or retrieved for this purpose alone cannot usually be used to identify you. Marketing Marketing The technical storage or access is required to create user profiles to send advertising, or to track the user on a website or across several websites for similar marketing purposes. Manage options Manage services Manage {vendor_count} vendors Read more about these purposes Accept Deny View preferences Save preferences View preferences {title} {title} {title} Manage consent