This Could Be the Beginning of the End for Poland’s “LGBT-Free” Zones | Them News Politics Culture Art Entertainment Books Celebrity Music TV and Movies Style Beauty Fashion Community Activism History One of Them T4T Tender Answers & Advice Sex & Relationships Health Gender & Identity Safety & Legal Astrology First Person Mental Health Video Search Human content, AI powered search. Search Home > News > Latest Stories Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images U.S. Associate Supreme Court Justice Ketanji Brown Jackson listens as U.S. President Donald Trump speaks during inauguration ceremonies in the Rotunda of the U.S. Capitol on January 20, 2025. Politics Why Ketanji Brown Jackson’s Warning About the Latest SCOTUS Ruling Includes Forgotten Voters Like Transgender Americans By Christopher Wiggins , September 25, 2026 Simon Ackerman/WireImage / John Nacion/WireImage Dakota Johnson & Anne Hathaway TV and Movies Dakota Johnson Teases Her "Spicy Sapphic Scenes" With Anne Hathaway as "Incredibly Enjoyable" By Ricky Cornish , September 25, 2026 TheStewartofNY/GC Images TV and Movies Lili Reinhart Says Hollywood Is “Too Afraid” to Make Her Lesbian Vampire Novella Adaptation. Why? By Mathew Rodriguez , September 25, 2026 Newsletter Close Get the best of what's queer - right to your inbox Will be used in accordance with our Privacy Policy . Search News Politics Culture Art Entertainment Books Celebrity Music TV and Movies Style Beauty Fashion Community Activism History One of Them T4T Tender Answers & Advice Sex & Relationships Health Gender & Identity Safety & Legal Astrology First Person Mental Health Video Follow us Facebook X (formerly Twitter) Instagram By continuing to use our site, you agree to our Privacy Policy and Terms of Use . Accept Home > News > Getty Images This Could Be the Beginning of the End for Poland’s “LGBT-Free” Zones Three more Polish provinces have repealed their anti-LGBTQ+ resolutions. By Molly Sprayregen , September 23, 2021 UPDATE (9/29): Three more Polish provinces have joined the growing number of regional authorities in repealing symbolic resolutions declaring them to be “LGBT-free.” On Monday, the provinces of Podkarpackie, Małopolska, and Lubelskie repealed their “LGBT-free” designations following demands from the European Union earlier this month. The European Commission, which represents the EU’s executive branch, warned authorities that they could lose critical funding if the statements were not rescinded, according to Reuters . Podkarpackie, which is located in the southeast corner of Poland, replaced its anti-LGBTQ+ ordinance with a statement affirming that the province is “a region of well-established tolerance,” as NBC News reports. The actions of Małopolska and Lubelskie, both likewise located in the southern half of Poland, are particularly notable given that they had previously voted to keep their “LGBT-free” zones intact. Małopolska Council Leader Jan Duda, who is also the father of Poland’s right-wing president, Andrzej Duda, claimed in its August vote that the resolution “has been misunderstood.” “We cannot simply deny what was said in 2019,” he said, as Reuters reported at the time. But his fellow councilmember, Witold Kozłowski, struck a different tone after the regional body reversed its decision this week in a 16-7 vote. He claimed that the move represents a “consensus that not every party is entirely satisfied with.” “It was only our voice about the importance and value of the family that caused the creation of just such a declaration [against LGBTQ+ people],” Kozłowski said of the 2020 resolution in a statement cited by the television network Euro News . “Małopolska is a strong region, built on values and based on centuries-old Christian tradition.” ORIGINAL (9/23): A Polish province has overturned a resolution declaring the region an “LGBT-free” zone after the European Union (EU) threatened to withhold billions in aid. On Wednesday, the Swietokrzyskie Regional Assembly voted unanimously to repeal a 2019 statute expressing “deep disapproval and strong opposition to the attempts by liberal political and social circles to promote an ideology based on LGBT affirmation,” as the A ssociated Press reports. Leaders in the rural province, which is located in southern Poland, further claimed that so-called LGBTQ+ “ideology” contradicts the Christian traditions of both the country and Europe at large. After voting 25-0 to repeal the anti-LGBTQ+ resolution, Swietokrzyskie lawmakers replaced it with a new ordinance emphasizing the constitutional guarantee that families are free to raise their children in a way that aligns with their beliefs. The province, however, asserted that those rights do not usurp “equality and fair treatment for all.” Bart Staszewski, a filmmaker and co-founder of the Equality March in neighboring Lublin, said the vote represented a “great day for Poland and great success of activists and civil society.” “I am really moved,” Staszewski told the AP . Swietokrzyskie is the first Polish region to repeal its designation as an “LGBT-free” zone since more than 100 cities and municipalities began passing the symbolic resolutions in 2019. Many of these declarations pledge to oppose “political correctness,” “homo-propaganda,” and “sexualization of Polish children,” according to a report from the Council of Europe . The resolutions have found support in Poland’s ruling Law and Justice Party (PiS), which has stoked anti-LGBTQ+ hatred since coming to power in 2015. PiS leaders referred to queer and trans people as “pedophiles” and “a threat to the nation,” and the country’s president, Andrzej Duda, has claimed that LGBTQ+ rights is “destructive to man.” In March, Duda announced plans to ban same-sex adoptions, and police have begun cracking down on equality protests. Although “LGBT free” zones are legally enforceable, they have worsened the homophobic climate to which LGBTQ+ people already live under. Rocks and bottles were thrown at attendees of the first-ever Pride parade in the northeastern city of Białystok two years ago. That same year in Wrocław, a knife-wielding attacker ran through Warsaw’s Equality March while attempting to stab participants. Activists have called on the European Union (EU) to take decisive action against Poland’s “LGBT-free” zones, which now encompass a third of the nation’s geography. The global LGBTQ+ rights organization All Out delivered a petition in September 2020 calling on the EU to force Poland to “respect the principles of tolerance and nondiscrimination,” as the group’s director of programs, Mathias Wasik, told them . at the time. Over 340,000 people reportedly signed the petition. The EU responded in March by declared itself an LGBTQ+ “freedom zone” before announcing a lawsuit against Poland in July. The suit accuses Polish leaders of violating Article 2 of the Treaty of the European Union, which mandates “respect for human dignity, freedom, democracy, equality, the rule of law and respect for human rights, including the rights of persons belonging to minorities.” EU leaders have also claimed that Polish municipalities that do not revoke their “LGBT-free” zones could be denied critical pandemic relief . But even as some Polish authorities revoke their anti-LGBTQ+ resolutions in the face of EU backlash, others are not budging. The regions of Małopolska and Lubelskie have voted to stay “LGBT-free” in recent weeks, according to Reuters . Małopolska Council Leader Jan Duda, who also happens to be the father of President Andrezj Duda, claimed its ordinance “has been misunderstood” following the August vote. Małopolska is the largest province in Poland, representing more than 3.4 million people, and is also home to the nation’s most populous city and capital, Warsaw. “We cannot simply deny what was said in 2019,” Duda said in comments reported by Reuters . Get the best of what’s queer. Sign up for them .'s weekly newsletter here. Read more Them stories: Two Pride Marches in Poland Took a Stand Against “LGBT Free” Zones Molly Sprayregen. Read more TAGS: europe news lgbtq+ rights Get the best of what's queer - right to your inbox Will be used in accordance with our Privacy Policy . Read more Last Ditch Bar and Arts Venue/lastditchvenue.com Last Ditch News Massachusetts Lesbian Bar Last Ditch Finally Responds to Its Viral Moment By Mathew Rodriguez , September 25, 2026 Jack Walker/The Advocate Youth participants share their artwork with Mayor Zohran Mamdani and Prime Minister Rob Jetten. News Gay Dutch Prime Minister & Zohran Mamdani Visit LGBTQ+ Archive — and Hear From Young New Yorkers It Serves By Jack Walker , September 24, 2026 Spencer Platt/Getty Images Sarah Sherman, Hannah Einbinder and protesters against Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and his war in Gaza block a street next to the United Nations (U.N.) on September 24, 2026, in New York City. News Hannah Einbinder and Other LGBTQ+ Celebrities Arrested at Anti-Netanyahu Protest By Ariel Messman-Rucker , September 24, 2026 X / @laurenboebert Lauren Boebert posted a video response to media reporting on an ethics complaint alleging she had relationships with current and former staffers. News Lauren Boebert Calls Reporting on Alleged Same-Sex Relationships "Filthy Garbage" By Jacob Ogles , September 21, 2026 equalpride.com Jay Katari resigned from equalpride's board following controversy about his social media history. News Equalpride Board Member Steps Down Following Report of MAGA Support By Christopher Wiggins , September 15, 2026 The Episcopal Diocese of Wisconsin/All Saints’ Cathedral News The Episcopal Church Has Its First Transgender Dean By Jacob Ogles , September 15, 2026 Envato Journalists at The Advocate, Out and Them are demanding answers from equalpride CEO Mark Berryhill on the MAGA-friendly board member he recently gave his full confidence. News Leading LGBTQ+ Newsroom Confronts Parent Company Over Board Member’s MAGA Support By Christopher Wiggins , Samantha Allen , Daniel Reynolds , September 14, 2026 Theo Wargo/WireImage Bob Mackie News Bob Mackie, Famous Gay Fashion and Costume Designer, Dies at 87 By Ariel Messman-Rucker , September 14, 2026 Them is the award-winning authority on what LGBTQ+ means today — and tomorrow. From in-depth storytelling on the fight for LGBTQ+ rights to intimate profiles of queer cultural vanguards, it’s a platform for all of the bold, stylish, and rebellious ways that LGBTQ+ people are reshaping our world every day. Facebook X (formerly Twitter) Instagram About Them Contact Career opportunities Advertise with us Privacy Policy Terms of Use Legal Notice