Germany: Gender switch neo-Nazi sent to men's prison You need to enable JavaScript to run this app. Skip to content Skip to main menu Skip to more DW sites Latest videos Latest audio Regions Africa Asia Europe Latin America Middle East North America Germany Topics Climate Equality Health Human Rights Migration Technology Categories Business Science Environment Culture Sports In focus German politics Ethiopia United Nations Latest audio Latest videos Live TV Advertisement Crime Germany Germany: Gender switch neo-Nazi sent to men's prison Richard Connor with AFP, dpa, Reuters 07/16/2026 July 16, 2026 Far-right provocateur Marla Svenja Liebich was transferred to a men's prison after being extradited from the Czech Republic. Authorities say the decision took into account the safety of prisoners at a women's facility. https://p.dw.com/p/5HFGM Marla-Svenja Liebich was formerly known as Sven Liebich [FILE: June 1, 2026] Image: Eva Korinkova/REUTERS Advertisement German neo-Nazi Marla Svenja Liebich was transferred to a men's prison on Thursday, despite being legally registered as a woman. Liebich changed the legal gender entry from male to female and adopted the first names Marla Svenja in 2025. Critics described the move as a provocation and an abuse of Germany's self-determination law . What do we know about the decision? The management of a women's prison in the eastern city of Chemnitz made the decision after Liebich was extradited from the Czech Republic on Wednesday. Liebich was initially taken to the Chemnitz facility but was moved later that day to Zeithain prison in the Meissen district, the state of Saxony's Justice Ministry told the dpa news agency. "Tricks, deceptions and games never succeed within the rule of law. It is fortunate that the correctional facility acted swiftly to clarify the situation and refused to play along with staged theatrics," Geiert said in a statement. The move "prioritised the safety of women in the Chemnitz correctional system," she said. Officials said the decision followed a conversation with Liebich and a medical examination. Why is Liebich in prison? Liebich was sentenced in July 2023 to 18 months in prison without parole for incitement to hatred, defamation and insult. The sentence was due to begin in August 2025. The 55-year-old disappeared last August after failing to report to a women's prison in Germany to serve the sentence. The male prison in Zeithain, to which Liebich was transferred Image: Katharina Kausche/dpa/picture alliance Czech authorities arrested Liebich in April. Liebich has been a high-profile figure in eastern Germany's right-wing extremist scene for decades. Liebich has regularly organized far-right demonstrations since 2014, many of them in the central market square in Halle. The events repeatedly led to confrontations with counterprotesters and several court cases. A court has yet to decide whether the changes can be reversed. Edited by: Dmytro Hubenko Don't let the algorithm hide the news. If you rely on our team for trusted reporting, please take a moment to select us as your Preferred Source on Google by clicking here and hitting the "star" or "preferred" button , so you'll always see our verified news first. Richard Connor Reporting on stories from around the world, with a particular focus on Europe — especially Germany. Send us your feedback Your feedback Advertisement Skip next section Explore more Explore more Prefer DW on Google news.google.com Skip next section More on Crime from Europe More on Crime from Europe UK: 5 arrested after 'major incident' near Fairford air base Bomb disposal teams were checking "suspicious vehicles" in Whelford, near a UK air base used by the US military. Crime 09/27/2026 September 27, 2026 Cheap But Deadly - On the Trail of Product Counterfeiters Germany, a key market for counterfeit goods in Europe: from fake designer brands to life-threatening medications. Crime 09/22/2026 September 22, 2026 German police probe arson attack on Wuppertal synagogue The man was detained near the scene shortly after allegedly trying to set fire to Wuppertal's synagogue. Crime 09/18/2026 September 18, 2026 Show more Skip next section Related topics Related topics Germany Footer About DW Who we are Press DW Global Media Forum DW offers Learn German DW Akademie Service Newsletters Reception FAQ Contact Topics from A to Z Headlines B2B Sales & Distribution Travel Advertising German News Service Follow us on Add DW as preferred source on Google © 2026 Deutsche Welle Privacy Policy Legal notice Digital accessibility Data privacy settings