Bangladesh police arrest dozens of third-gender people Now Reading Bangladesh police arrest dozens of third-gender people Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate Bangladesh police arrest dozens of third-gender people by Contributing Writer October 22, 2025 Contributing Writer Read Next On beyond homophobia: Russian police raid ‘kissing party‘ Bangladesh advocates allege police extorted money, call for release of Hijras Bangladeshi Hijras being taken to the Narayanganj court by Rupganj Police in a police van after their arrest on allegations in a false extortion case. Dozens of Hijras have been detained in arbitrary arrests across Bangladesh following refusal to pay extortion money to police, JMBF alleges. (Photo courtesy of JMBF) A series of brutal attacks and arbitrary arrests of dozens of members of the Hijra (third gender) community in Bangladesh have led LGBTQ advocacy group JusticeMakers Bangladesh in France (JMBF) to call for the immediate arrest and exemplary punishment of the perpetrators, as well as the unconditional release of the arrested Hijras and the withdrawal of all false cases filed against them. According to reports published in different newspapers and verified by JMBF’s reliable sources, members of the Hijra community in Chattogram in southeastern Bangladesh were assaulted for filing a complaint with the police after refusing to pay extortion money around 9pm on September 10. At least twelve Hijras were injured in the attack that took place in the Gomdondi Phultala area of the municipal town. In another incident on September 17, police arrested twelve members of the Hijra community who were collecting money from expatriate-carrying vehicles — a traditional and long-standing means of livelihood for them — in Narayanganj, a city near the capital Dhaka. JMBF firmly believes that the victims were attacked and arrested solely because they refused to pay extortion money and were engaged in their traditional livelihood practices, which constitutes a clear violation of their human rights. See Also 2025 LGBTQ rights update: Many bright spots in Asia amid the gloom “Such acts of physical violence and arbitrary arrests against the Hijra community are clear violations of fundamental human rights and civil liberties. The international community and the Government of Bangladesh must take prompt and effective measures to investigate these incidents and bring the perpetrators to justice,” says Robert Simon, Chief Advisor of JMBF. “Under the current interim government, the continuing attacks, false cases, and arrests targeting members of the Hijra (third gender) community reflect deep-rooted intolerance and discrimination. We urge the law enforcement authorities in Bangladesh to conduct impartial investigations and ensure justice for the victims. The protection and dignity of sexual minorities are fundamental responsibilities of the state,” says JMBF founder and president Shahanur Islam.< Hijras crying after being physically assaulted by an organised group while returning from the Boalkhali Police Station in Chittagong, after submitting a complaint against the same group for demanding extortion money. (Photo courtesy of JMBF) JMBF has issued a list of demands for action by the government: The government and law enforcement agencies must conduct an independent and impartial investigation into the incidents of violence and arbitrary arrests against the Hijra community in Boalkhali (Chattogram) and Rupganj (Narayanganj), identify the perpetrators, and ensure appropriate punishment under the law. The immediate and unconditional release of all arrested Hijras and the withdrawal of all false cases filed against them. The government must take necessary measures to ensure the safety, livelihood, and security of all members of the Hijra (third gender) and sexual minority communities in Bangladesh. The government must take the initiative to provide mandatory human rights and sensitivity training to all members of law enforcement agencies regarding the rights of the Hijra and other sexual minority communities. The government must ensure that medical treatment, psychosocial support, and adequate financial compensation are provided to all victims of the attacks. The government should immediately enact a “Sexual Minority Protection Act” to ensure legal protection and safeguard the rights of the Hijra and other sexual minority communities in Bangladesh. In a press release , JMBF states that it believes that ensuring the rights, dignity, and safety of the Hijra (third gender) community is not only a humanitarian obligation but also a constitutional and international duty of the Government of Bangladesh, and urges both the Bangladeshi authorities and the international community to take effective steps to stop such violence, intimidation, and discrimination. Contributing Writer October 22, 2025 The Latest Posts Turkey’s anti-LGBT crackdown expands; activists fight back Proposed Ukraine law would expand ban on anti-LGBTQ discrimination A third of LGBTQ groups say 2025’s drastic cuts will force them to close Bangladesh activists launch petition to end anti-LGBTQ discrimination Uganda’s ‘Not Free’ rating partly due to anti-LGBT laws Appeal to Indonesia to stop listing ‘LGBTQ culture’ as a national threat LGBTI+ rights activists in Turkey seek international support during crackdown Analysis: Cameroon’s anti-gay raids violated Cameroon’s own rules Ghana’s £10m deal is dead; gay fans won’t be lured to homophobic nation Turkey: 162 targeted in anti-LGBTQ+ raids Trans Ghanaian artist releases protest song ‘Coward’ Previous Article On beyond homophobia: Russian police raid ‘kissing party‘ Next Article View Comments (0) Leave a Reply Cancel reply Your email address will not be published. Name * E-mail * Website Notify me of new posts by email. Δ Related Posts Bangladesh activists launch petition to end anti-LGBTQ discrimination Murder suspected in death of sexual minority leader in Bangladesh Bangladesh students expelled over homosexuality allegations Bangladesh watchdog protests anti-lesbian police operation Bangladesh students detained, expelled over alleged homosexuality Bangladesh students expelled and jailed over alleged homosexuality About The Erasing 76 Crimes news site covers the human toll of 66+ countries’ anti-gay laws and the struggle to repeal them. Member Members of the African Human Rights Media Network publish news articles and other media that educate readers about sexual minorities’ struggle for recognition of their human rights. Partner The St. Paul’s Foundation for International Reconciliation promotes LGBTQ+ rights through fact-based advocacy journalism and community projects. (California charity 80-0647355) © 2026 Erasing 76crimes. All rights reserved. Scroll To Top Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate Facebook Twitter Instagram Discover more from Erasing 76 Crimes Subscribe now to keep reading and get access to the full archive. Type your email… Subscribe Continue reading PRESS ESC TO CLOSE