Slovak parliament should reject bill making legal gender recognition impossible Slovak parliament should reject bill making legal gender recognition impossible Which language would you like to use this site in? English Español Français العربية 简中 繁中 Русский Close English Français Who We Are How We’re Run Work with us What We Do Countries Get Involved Take Action Become a member Take an online course Latest News Campaigns Education Research Impact Search Donate Now ul" aria-expanded="false" aria-controls="mobile-menu" aria-label="Open navigation" > Who We Are Who We Are How We’re Run Work with us What We Do Countries Get Involved Get Involved Take Action Become a member Take an online course Latest Latest News Campaigns Education Research Impact Search ©Samuel Kubani/AFP via Getty Images News 17 May 2023 Also available in Français Slovakia: Parliament should reject bill making legal gender recognition impossible Reacting to the prospect of a vote in the Slovak parliament on or before Friday 19 May on legislation that will make legal gender recognition impossible, Rado Sloboda, Director of Amnesty International Slovakia, said: “Transgender people have been able to access legal gender recognition in Slovakia for more than 40 years but the Slovak parliament is now proposing to change legislation and remove this right. “Amnesty International is calling on members of the Slovak parliament to reject this bill which jeopardizes the rights of transgender people and places the Slovak Republic in breach of its obligations under international human rights law. Today is the International Day Against Homophobia, Biphobia, and Transphobia, and the Slovak government needs to be aware that the world is watching and will not be silent if the country violates people’s human rights. Rado Sloboda, Director, Amnesty International Slovakia “Today is the International Day Against Homophobia, Biphobia, and Transphobia, and the Slovak government needs to be aware that the world is watching and will not be silent if the country violates people’s human rights. “This law will gravely impact the rights of transgender people, forcing them to reveal their gender assigned at birth in everyday circumstances, such as signing for parcels. It will increase the risk of bullying, discrimination, or violence, and impact the right to privacy. This bill should not pass.” Background The National Assembly of the Slovak Republic is due to vote on Bill No. 301/1995, also known as the Birth Number Act which, if adopted, would force transgender people to prove they have the ‘correct’ set of chromosomes to have their legal gender affirmed. The act regulates birth numbers, the personal 10 digit identifier given to everyone in Slovakia on the day they are born. It includes information about the date of birth, and numbers for two genders – women are given the number 5, and men the numeral 0. The birth number must be changed to have your gender legally affirmed, but the law would effectively make this impossible, as most transgender people don’t have chromosomes matching their gender identity. Discrimination LGBTI Rights News Press Release Slovakia News Related Content Country Slovakia News Slovakia: Anti-NGO law a ‘full-frontal assault on civil society’ News Slovakia: Draconian bill restricting right to protest must be redrawn Press Release Slovakia: Proposed constitutional amendments would crush the rights of LGBTIQ+ people and be a backward step for gender equality News Slovakia: Parliament must reject draconian constitutional amendments Recently added Austria: “End Genocide” protest at UEFA Nations League Israel game Yemen: One year on, Huthis must release arbitrarily detained lawyer Abdul Majid Sabra USA: Amnesty International Calls for ICE to Be Abolished After Documenting Widespread Human Rights Violations in Anti-Immigrant Operations Europe: Sale of Israel Bonds finally ends in Europe 38 Global Civil Society Organizations file joint brief in US lawsuit challenging legality of Trump’s ICC sanctions Donate to protect human rights Together we can fight for human rights everywhere. Your donation can transform the lives of millions. Donate now About Us Contact Us How We’re Run Modern Slavery Act Statement Finances Resources Media Centre Human Rights Education Human Rights Courses Annual report archive Get involved Join Take Action Volunteer Latest News Campaigns Research Work With Us If you are talented and passionate about human rights then Amnesty International wants to hear from you. Jobs & Internships Privacy Policy Terms of Use Accessibility Cookie Statement Permissions Refunds of Donations © 2026 Amnesty International Follow us on: Facebook Instagram X TikTok Bluesky YouTube LinkedIn