Federal and Local Authorities in Mexico Must Step Up Efforts to Prevent and Punish Acts of Violence Against Trans People English Español Português It looks like JavaScript is either disabled or turned off. Please enable JavaScript to correctly view this web site. Parece que JavaScript está desactivado o apagado. Por favor, activar JavaScript para ver este sitio de web. Afigura-se o JavaScript está desativado ou desligado. Por favor ative o JavaScript para visualizar este site. Il semble que JavaScript est dásactivé. S'il vous plaît, activer JavaScript pour visualiser ce site. About the IACHR What is the IACHR? Composition Mandate and Functions Basic documents Resolutions IACHR on the Caribbean IACHR's timeline Statistics Staff Employment Fellowships Internships Strategic Plans Financial Resources Accountability on human resources - GS/OAS Cases Petition and Case System Present a Petition Legal Assistance Fund Cases and Petitions Statistics Inter-American Justice Events Admissibilities Inadmissibilities Friendly Settlements Merits Archive of petitions and cases in process Archive of petitions in initial review Cases in the Court Digest of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights on its Admissibility and Competence Criteria Precautionary Measures About precautionary measures History and legal framework Supervision of Precautionary Measures in Force How to request a precautionary measure Granted Follow-up Lifted Resolutions on Strengthening Videos Hearings Press releases Pronouncement on social networks Petition System Portal PM Statistics Follow-up Follow-up of Recommendations Bolivia: MESEG-Bolivia Chile: MESECH-Chile Colombia: MESEG-Colombia Nicaragua: MESENI Venezuela: MESEVE Mexico: Ayotzinapa Reports Annual Country Thematic Monitoring Practical guides Compendiums Multimedia Petitions and Cases Consultation questionnaires Periods of Sessions 197 Period of Sessions Calendar of Sessions Hearings Relevant Information on Public Hearings Activities Country Visits Civil society SACROI COVID-19 Courses Cooperation Agreements Academic Network Rapporteurships Rapporteurships Distribution Indigenous Peoples Women Human Mobility Freedom of Expression Children Human Rights Defenders and Justice Operators Persons Deprived of Liberty Afro-Descendants and against Racial Discrimination Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and Intersex Persons Economic, Social, Cultural, and Environmental Rights Memory, Truth, and Justice Rights of Older Persons Rights of Persons with Disabilities Media Press Releases Speeches Joint Declarations Press conferences Canal CIDH Calendar of Sessions 60 years E-mail subscriptions Contact the Press Office User support What we do? Areas of Action Frequently asked question Newsletters Links of interest Contact Us OAS IACHR Media Center Press Releases 2024 197 Press Release Press Releases Speeches Joint Declarations Press conferences Canal CIDH Calendar of Sessions 60 years E-mail subscriptions Contact the Press Office Federal and local authorities in Mexico must step up efforts to prevent and punish acts of violence against trans people August 29, 2024 Related links Contact info IACHR Press Office [email protected] Distribution List Subscribe to our distribution list Washington, D.C. - The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) expressed its concern about the acts of violence against trans and gender-diverse people that have been publicly reported in Mexico in 2024. These acts of violence, motivated by prejudice, constitute a serious violation of the fundamental principles of equality and nondiscrimination, as well as other human rights. The IACHR condemns the violence against LGBTI persons and the violent deaths of trans and gender-diverse persons. The information from the media indicates that, 36 murders of trans women have been reported since January. In June and July alone, at least 8 trans individuals were murdered in different states of Mexico. By comparison, 43 cases were publicly documented throughout 2023. The IACHR has learned that a trans woman known as Trinity died on June 6 in a Mexico City hospital after being the victim of physical and sexual violence. On the same day, the body of Mónica Mancilla was found on the banks of the Usumacinta River in Tabasco. On June 15, authorities found the corpse of Kenia Cruz , signs of having suffered violence, in her home in Tabasco. On June 28, Ana Arana died of knife wounds in Mexico City. In July, 3 trans women were murdered in the same week in Nuevo León: Arantza Castillo , who was found dead after being reported missing earlier in the month; activist Jaqueline “la Española”; and a third woman whose identity remains unknown. On July 19, trans woman and sex worker Cristell Martínez died after being shot. The IACHR has noted that, in the region, prejudice-based violence is characterized by cruelty and viciousness that seek to “punish” the gender identity or sexual diversity of the victims. Likewise, the lack of due diligence in investigations may lead to an alarming situation of impunity. The IACHR urges the State to investigate all human rights violations against LGBTI persons, especially acts of violence, taking a gender perspective and differentiated, intersectional approaches in its investigations that respect victims’ gender identity and protect their human rights. Federal and local authorities have an obligation to prevent, investigate, prosecute, and sanction prejudice-based crimes. Considering the constitutional powers in criminal matters assigned to the federal entities, the duty of these entities to ensure that investigations are carried out impartially, free of prejudice and with due diligence, in accordance with international standards, is underscored. It is fundamental that the Mexican State and local authorities step up their efforts to combat prejudice-based violence and strengthen coordination mechanisms between the different levels of government to ensure an effective, comprehensive response to these crimes. Likewise, there must be compliance with standards already implemented by the Mexican State, such as the National Protocol on LGBTI+ Action. The IACHR reiterates its willingness to support the State in combating prejudice-based violence and ensuring the rights of LGBTI persons. The IACHR is a principal and autonomous organ of the Organization of American States (OAS), whose mandate derives from the OAS Charter and the American Convention on Human Rights. The Inter-American Commission is mandated to promote the observance and defense of human rights in the region and acts as a consultative body to the OAS in this area. The IACHR is composed of seven independent members who are elected by the OAS General Assembly in their personal capacity and do not represent their countries of origin or residence. No. 197/24 10:40 AM © Copyright 2026 OAS Internships Fellowships Vacancies Terms & Conditions Contact Us Related Links 1889 F St. N.W. Washington, D.C., U.S.A. 20006