Skip to main content
What's On
Parliament TV
Scottish Parliament Website home
Search the website
Search
Open search
Close Search
Open menu
Main navigation
Home
Bills and laws
Bills and laws
A bill is a proposed Act of the Scottish Parliament. A bill that is introduced in the Scottish Parliament is scrutinised and debated by MSPs.
Go to Bills and laws
Current and previous bills
List of Bills
Post-legislative Scrutiny
Proposals for bills
Legislative Consent Memorandums
About legislative consent
About bills and laws
Acts and SSIs
MSPs
MSPs
MSPs take part in examining and passing proposed laws (Bills). They represent you in the Scottish Parliament and your local area. And they examine the work of the Scottish Government.
Go to MSPs
Current and previous MSPs
Find your MSP by postcode
Current party balance
About MSPs
Elections
2026 election results
Code of Conduct
Presiding Officer's Guidance on Conduct in the Chamber
Members' expenses
MSP salaries
MSP pensions
Financial interests of MSPs
Ministers and Law Officers
Chamber and committees
Chamber and committees
Information about committees and records of all debates, questions and answers.
Go to Chamber and committees
What's On
What's New
Parliament TV
Official Report: what was said in Parliament
Search questions and answers
Search Votes and motions
Committees
List of committees
Committee reports
About committees
Guidance on Committees
Research by SPICe
Fact sheets
Research briefings
SPICe Spotlight blogs
Academic engagement
The Chamber
About the Debating Chamber
Guidance on Chamber Business
Minutes of Chamber meetings
Journal of the Parliament
Get involved
Get involved
You can get involved with the Scottish Parliament by joining a Cross-party group, submitting a petition, lobbying or exploring our education resources.
Go to Get involved
Petitions
Start a petition
Support a petition
Languages
British Sign Language
Gaelic
Submit your views
Education
Education sessions for schools
Cross-party groups
Hold an event or exhibition
Academic engagement
Organise a protest
Participation and Communities Team
Visit
Visit
Find out about tours and events at the Scottish Parliament.
Go to Visit
Tickets for debates and meetings
First Minister's Questions
Debates in the Chamber
Committee meetings
Tours
Group visits
Guided tours
School visits
Events and exhibitions
A Parliament for the People
Festival of Politics
Plan your visit
Virtual tour
Parliament café
Gift shop
Crèche
Behaviour
About
About
The Scottish Parliament examines what the Scottish Government is doing, makes new laws on devolved matters and debates the issues of the day.
Go to About
Careers
Working for the Scottish Parliament
Working for an MSP
Find current jobs
How the Parliament works
Organisations, groups and people
Rules and guidance
Policies
Recess dates
Information rights
Data protection
Freedom of Information
Copyright
Sustainability
Sustainable development route maps
News
International relations
Accounts and statistics
History of the Parliament
Contact us
Loading…
Home
Bills and laws
Back to
Bills (proposed laws)
Gender Recognition Reform (Scotland) Bill
Gender Recognition Reform (Scotland) Bill
The Bill changes the process to get a gender recognition certificate (GRC). A GRC is a certificate that legally recognises that a person’s gender is not the gender that they were assigned at birth, but is their “ acquired gender ”.
This is a Government Bill.
The Bill was introduced on 2 March 2022. Stage 3 ended on 22 December 2022.
Introduced
Gender Recognition Reform (Scotland) Bill has completed Introduced
Stage 1
Gender Recognition Reform (Scotland) Bill has completed Stage 1
Stage 2
Gender Recognition Reform (Scotland) Bill has completed Stage 2
Stage 3
Gender Recognition Reform (Scotland) Bill has completed Stage 3
Act
Act has not been reached yet
The Bill has been passed. Royal Assent is required for it to become an Act.
An Order made under Section 35 of the Scotland Act 1998 means that this Bill cannot receive Royal Assent in its current form.
Explore the guidance and rules for Bills
See the process for Bills and how to share your views
Show all stages
Introduced: the Bill and its documents
Overview
The Bill changes the process to get a gender recognition certificate (GRC). A GRC is a certificate that legally recognises that a person’s gender is not the gender that they were assigned at birth, but is their “ acquired gender ”.
The current process for obtaining a GRC is set out in the Gender Recognition Act 2004. This Bill amends that Act to make a new process in Scotland.
The Bill sets out:
who can apply for a GRC
how to make an application
the grounds on which an application is to be granted
It also makes provision about:
different types of GRC that may be issued in different circumstances (“full” GRCs and “interim” GRCs)
appeals and reviews of decisions to grant (or not grant) GRCs
revocation of a GRC and offences in connection with false information being provided in an application
Why the Bill was created
The Bill aims to improve the process for people applying for legal gender recognition. The Scottish Government considers that the current system is intrusive and can take a long time, which can have a negative impact on applicants. The Government has two specific concerns, which the Bill would mitigate:
current rules require a medical diagnosis of “ gender dysphoria ” and supporting evidence with the application
16 and 17 year olds are not currently allowed to apply for a GRC, which the Government believes is a further negative impact on trans young people
The Government considers that the process set out in the Bill is a balanced and proportionate way of improving the current process of obtaining legal gender recognition. The Government also has included two elements to the Bill to ensure that the process will continue to be a significant step:
the existing requirement for a statutory declaration has been retained
offences have been created relating to giving false information in an application
The Bill also aims to simplify the process, which the Scottish Government considers to be complex.
Bill as Introduced
Gender Recognition Reform (Scotland) Bill (1MB, pdf) posted 02 March 2022
Ministerial statement
On 3 March 2022, the Cabinet Secretary for Social Justice, Housing and Local Government (Shona Robison) made a statement and answered questions on the introduction of the Gender Recognition Reform (Scotland) Bill.
Read the Official Report of the statement
Accompanying Documents
Explanatory Notes (219KB, pdf) posted 02 March 2022
Policy Memorandum (290KB, pdf) posted 02 March 2022
Financial Memorandum (149KB, pdf) posted 02 March 2022
Delegated Powers Memorandum (140KB, pdf) posted 02 March 2022
Statements on legislative competence (108KB, pdf) posted 02 March 2022
Accompanying Documents (print versions)
Explanatory Notes (338KB, pdf) posted 02 March 2022
Policy Memorandum (324KB, pdf) posted 02 March 2022
Financial Memorandum (196KB, pdf) posted 02 March 2022
Delegated Powers Memorandum (240KB, pdf) posted 02 March 2022
Statements on legislative competence (143KB, pdf) posted 02 March 2022
What are 'accompanying documents'?
All Bills introduced in the Parliament must be accompanied by specific documents. For most Bills, this includes:
Explanatory Notes: this document provides an overview of what the Bill does, plus a more detailed explanation of individual provisions.
Policy Memorandum: this sets out the objectives of the Bill. It also lists any alternatives considered, details of consultations, and an assessment of the effects of the Bill on a range of areas.
Financial Memorandum: this sets out estimates of costs, savings, and any changes to revenues expected to result from the Bill.
Delegated Powers Memorandum: this is needed if a Bill gives powers to make subordinate legislation or allows Scottish Ministers to issue directions, guidance or codes of practice.
Statements on legislative competence: two short statements, one by the Presiding Officer and one by the Member introducing the Bill. “Legislative competence” means the powers the Parliament has to make law.
Financial Resolution
The Presiding Officer has decided under Rule 9.12 of Standing Orders that a financial resolution is not required for this Bill.
What is a Financial Resolution?
For each Bill, the Presiding Officer must decide if a 'Financial Resolution' is required. The main reasons a Bill would need a Financial Resolution are that:
it would be likely to increase public spending significantly
it would be likely to increase taxation, or would require certain payments to be made.
If a Bill requires a Financial Resolution:
only the Scottish Government can propose it, usually at the end of Stage 1
until a Financial Resolution is agreed, Stage 2 can’t get under way.
Research on the Bill
The Scottish Parliament's Information Centre (SPICe) prepares impartial research and analysis to assist MSPs in their examination of Bills and other parliamentary business.
Research briefing on the Gender Recognition Reform (Scotland) Bill
The Bill was introduced on 2 March 2022
Stage 1: general principles
At Stage 1, the Bill is given to a lead committee. This is usually the committee whose remit most closely relates to the subject of the Bill. The lead committee will consider and report on the Bill. Other committees may also examine the Bill and report to the lead committee. Finally, there is a debate and vote by all MSPs on the general principles of the Bill. If the general principles are not agreed to, then the Bill ‘falls’ and can’t become law.
Timetable for Stage 1
The Parliament agreed that consideration of the Bill at Stage 1 be completed by 28 October 2022.
Lead committee examines the Bill
The lead committee for this Bill is the Equalities, Human Rights and Civil Justice Committee .
What is a lead committee?
The lead committee will usually examine the Bill through evidence sessions. This will involve contributions from individuals and organisations, known as 'witnesses', with knowledge of the subject matter. The committee might also discuss the Bill in private sessions.
Call for views (closed)
The Equalities, Human Rights and Civil Justice Committee ran a call for views to help inform its examination of the Bill.
The call for views closed on 16 May 2022.
Read the responses on Citizen Space
Read the summary of short survey responses (555KB, pdf) posted 23 May 2022
Meetings of the lead committee
15 March 2022
Watch the meeting on Scottish Parliament TV
Read the agenda, papers and minutes for this meeting
17 May 2022
Read the Official Report of the meeting
Watch the meeting on Scottish Parliament TV
Read the agenda, papers and minutes for this meeting
24 May 2022
Read the Official Report of the meeting
Watch the meeting on Scottish Parliament TV
Read the agenda, papers and minutes for this meeting
31 May 2022
Read the Official Report of the meeting
Watch the meeting on Scottish Parliament TV
Read the agenda, papers and minutes for this meeting
07 June 2022
Read the Official Report of the meeting
Watch the meeting on Scottish Parliament TV
Read the agenda, papers and minutes for this meeting
14 June 2022
Read the Official Report of the meeting
Watch the meeting on Scottish Parliament TV
Read the agenda, papers and minutes for this meeting
21 June 2022
Read the Official Report of the meeting
Watch the meeting on Scottish Parliament TV
Read the agenda, papers and minutes for this meeting
22 June 2022
Read the Official Report of the meeting
Watch the meeting on Scottish Parliament TV
Read the agenda, papers and minutes for this meeting
28 June 2022
Read the Official Report of the meeting
Watch the meeting on Scottish Parliament TV
Read the agenda, papers and minutes for this meeting
06 September 2022
Read the Official Report of the meeting
Watch the meeting on Scottish Parliament TV
Read the agenda, papers and minutes for this meeting
20 September 2022
Read the Official Report of the meeting
Watch the meeting on Scottish Parliament TV
Read the agenda, papers and minutes for this meeting
27 September 2022
Read the agenda, papers and minutes for this meeting
04 October 2022
Read the Official Report of the meeting
Watch the meeting on Scottish Parliament TV
Read the agenda, papers and minutes for this meeting
Engagement
Other ways the committee heard views and experiences
The Committee held an informal briefing with officials from the Scottish Government’s Bill Team on 15 March to better understand the provisions in the Bill before starting formal oral evidence at stage 1. The Committee will hear from the Cabinet Secretary at conclusion of its evidence taking.
Read the summary of the informal session with the Scottish Government officials (72KB, pdf) posted 26 May 2022
As agreed at its meeting of 15 March, the Committee held two informal, private engagement sessions with trans people and other stakeholders.
Read the summary of the private engagement sessions (251KB, pdf) posted 26 May 2022
On 7 June, the Committee took private evidence from an anonymous witness.
Read the notes from the private evidence from an anonymous witness (183KB, pdf) posted 22 June 2022
On 20 June, the Committee held two informal, private engagement sessions with members of parent support groups.
Read the summary of the private engagement sessions (197KB, pdf) posted 18 July 2022
On 27 June, the Committee held two informal, private engagement sessions with people with lived experiences.
Read the summary of the private engagement sessions (178KB, pdf) posted 18 July 2022
Correspondence: lead committee
Gender Recognition Reform (Scotland) Bill
Letter to United Nations Special Rapporteur on violence against women and girls from MurrayBlackburnMackenzie and others, 5 December 2022
Scottish Government response to Equality and Human Rights Commission briefing on Gender Recognition Reform
Letter from the Cabinet Secretary for Social Justice, Housing and Local Government to the Chair of the Equality and Human Rights Commission, 30 November 2022
Gender Recognition Reform Gender Identity Healthcare
Letter from the Cabinet Secretary for Health and Social Care to the Convener of the Equalities, Human Rights and Civil Justice Committee, 21 November 2022
Further information regarding the application process for a Gender Recognition Certificate
Letter from the Cabinet Secretary for Social Justice, Housing and Local Government to Pam Duncan-Glancy MSP, 7 November 2022
Gender Recognition Reform (Scotland) Bill
Letter from HEAL Survivors Group to the Convener of the Equalities, Human Rights and Civil Justice Committee, 26 October 2022
See a full list of Stage 1 correspondence for this committee
Stage 1 report by the lead committee
The Equalities, Human Rights and Civil Justice Committee published its report on 6 October 2022.
Gender Recognition Reform (Scotland) Bill Stage 1 Report
The Committee received the following response to its report:
Scottish Government response to the Stage 1 Report, 26 October 2022
Work by other committees
Work by other committees
If a Bill is relevant to more than one committee, 'secondary committees' may consider and report on the general principles of the Bill to the lead committee. Some Bills may also be considered by the Delegated Powers and Law Reform Committee or the Finance and Public Administration Committee.
Finance and Public Administration Committee
Scrutiny of the Financial Memorandum
Delegated Powers and Law Reform Committee
Meetings
10 May 2022
Read the Official Report of the meeting
Watch the meeting on Scottish Parliament TV
Read the agenda, papers and minutes for this meeting
Report
The Delegated Powers and Law Reform Committee published its report on 16 May 2022.
Read the report
Stage 1 Debate and decision
A Stage 1 debate took place on 27 October 2022 to consider and decide on the general principles of the Bill.
27 October 2022
Read the Official Report of the meeting
Watch the meeting on Scottish Parliament TV
Read the minutes of the meeting (161KB, pdf) posted 27 October 2022
Motion title: Gender Recognition Reform (Scotland) Bill
Text of motion: That the Parliament agrees to the general principles of the Gender Recognition Reform (Scotland) Bill.
Submitted by: Shona Robison
Date lodged: Tuesday, 25 October 2022
Motion reference: S6M-06459
Current status: Taken in the Chamber on Thursday, 27 October 2022
Result
88 for, 33 against, 4 abstained, 4 did not vote
Agreed
See further details of the motion
Parliament agreed the general principles of the Bill
The Bill ended Stage 1 on 27 October 2022
Stage 2: changes to the Bill
At Stage 2, MSPs can propose changes to a Bill. These are called 'amendments'. Any MSP can suggest amendments but only members of the Stage 2 committee can decide on them.
First meeting on amendments
Documents with the amendments considered and debated at the meeting held on 15 November 2022.
First Marshalled List of Amendments for Stage 2 (984KB, pdf) posted 10 November 2022
First Groupings of Amendments for Stage 2 (1MB, pdf) posted 10 November 2022
15 November 2022
Read the agenda, papers and minutes for this meeting
Read the Official Report of the meeting
Watch the meeting on Scottish Parliament TV
Second meeting on amendments
Documents with the amendments considered and debated at the meeting held on 22 November 2022.
Second Marshalled List of Amendments for Stage 2 (631KB, pdf) posted 17 November 2022
Second Groupings of Amendments for Stage 2 (299KB, pdf) posted 17 November 2022
22 November 2022
Read the agenda, papers and minutes for this meeting
Read the Official Report of the meeting
Watch the meeting on Scottish Parliament TV
What is a 'Marshalled List' or 'Grouping of Amendments' at Stage 2?
A Stage 2 'Marshalled List' is a list of all the amendments that have been lodged at Stage 2 (or, if the Stage is mid-way through, all those still to be dealt with).  They are listed in the order in which they will be called by the convener and then decided on.
A 'Groupings' list shows how the amendments that are listed in the Marshalled List have been grouped together for debate. Each group contains amendments that are related to each other, even if they are at different places in the Marshalled List.
Stage 2 Correspondence
Gender Recognition Reform - correspondence between the Cabinet Secretary for Social Justice, Housing and Local Government and the UN Special Rapporteur on Violence against Women and Girls
Letter from the Cabinet Secretary for Social Justice, Housing and Local Government to the Convener of the Equalities, Human Rights and Civil Justice Committee, 29 November 2022
Multi Agency Public Protection Arrangements and applications for Gender Recognition Certificates
Letter from the Cabinet Secretary for Social Justice, Housing and Local Government to Pam Duncan-Glancy MSP, 22 November 2022
Bill as amended at Stage 2
Gender Recognition Reform (Scotland) Bill as amended at Stage 2 (2MB, pdf) posted 22 November 2022
Revised Documents
Revised Explanatory Notes (261KB, pdf) posted 20 December 2022
Supplementary Financial Memorandum (85KB, pdf) posted 07 December 2022
Revised Documents (print versions)
Revised Explanatory Notes (465KB, pdf) posted 15 December 2022
Supplementary Financial Memorandum (128KB, pdf) posted 07 December 2022
Revised and Supplementary Documents
Sometimes an amendment at Stage 2 makes substantial changes to a bill. If this happens, the Accompanying Documents need to be updated to explain what these changes are.
The Bill ended Stage 2 on 22 November 2022
Stage 3: final changes and vote
At Stage 3, MSPs can propose further amendments (changes) to the Bill. These are debated and decided on in the Debating Chamber. At this stage, all MSPs can vote on them.  There is then a debate on whether to pass the Bill. If the Bill is not passed, it ‘falls’ and can't become law.
Meeting of the Equalities, Human Rights and Civil Justice Committee
19 December 2022
Read the Official Report of the meeting
Watch the meeting on Scottish Parliament TV
Read the agenda, papers and minutes for this meeting
Debate on proposed amendments
Documents with the amendments considered and debated on 20 and 21 December 2022.
Marshalled List of Amendments for Stage 3 (1MB, pdf) posted 14 December 2022
Groupings of Amendments for Stage 3 (1MB, pdf) posted 19 December 2022
20 December 2022
Read the Official Report of the meeting
Watch the meeting on Scottish Parliament TV (Part 1)
Watch the meeting on Scottish Parliament TV (Part 2)
Watch the meeting on Scottish Parliament TV (Part 3)
Watch the meeting on Scottish Parliament TV (Part 4)
Watch the meeting on Scottish Parliament TV (Part 5)
Read the minutes of the meeting (156KB, pdf) posted 20 December 2022
21 December 2022
Read the Official Report of the meeting
Watch the meeting on Scottish Parliament TV (Part 6)
Watch the meeting on Scottish Parliament TV (Part 7)
Watch the meeting on Scottish Parliament TV (Part 8)
Watch the meeting on Scottish Parliament TV (Part 9)
Watch the meeting on Scottish Parliament TV (Part 10)
Read the minutes of the meeting (148KB, pdf) posted 22 December 2022
What is a 'Marshalled List' or 'Grouping of Amendments' at Stage 3?
A Stage 3 'Marshalled List' is a list of all the amendments that have been proposed at Stage 3 and that have been selected by the Presiding Officer. They are listed in the order in which they will be called by the Presiding Officer and then decided on.
A 'Groupings' list shows how the amendments that are listed in the Marshalled List have been grouped together for debate. Each group contains amendments that are related to each other, even if they are at different places in the Marshalled List.
‘Timed Groupings’ are usually produced at Stage 3 and set out how long Parliament expects to spend debating the groups of amendments.
Stage 3 Correspondence
Gender Recognition Reform (Scotland) Bill and the Equality Act
Letter from the Convener of the Equalities, Human Rights and Civil Justice Committee to the Chair of the Women and Equalities Committee, 9 February 2023
Gender Recognition Reform (Scotland) Bill Section 35 Order
Letter from the Cabinet Secretary for Social Justice, Housing and Local Government to the Convener of the Equalities, Human Rights and Civil Justice Committee, 5 February 2023
Gender Recognition Reform (Scotland) Bill Section 35 Order
Letter from The Rt Hon Alister Jack MP, Secretary of State for Scotland to the Convener of the Equalities, Human Rights and Civil Justice Committee, 30 January 2023
Gender Recognition Reform (Scotland) Bill Section 35 Order
Letter from the Convener of the Equalities, Human Rights and Civil Justice Committee to the Rt Hon Alister Jack MP, Secretary of State for Scotland, 25 January 2023
Gender Recognition Reform (Scotland) Bill Section 35 Order
Letter from the Convener of the Equalities, Human Rights and Civil Justice Committee to the Cabinet Secretary for Social Justice, Housing and Local Government, 25 January 2023
See a full list of Stage 3 correspondence for this committee
Final debate on the Bill
Once MSPs have decided on the amendments, they debate whether to pass the Bill.
22 December 2022
Read the Official Report of the meeting
Watch the meeting on Scottish Parliament TV
Read the minutes of the meeting (237KB, pdf) posted 22 December 2022
Motion title: Gender Recognition Reform (Scotland) Bill
Text of motion: That the Parliament agrees that the Gender Recognition Reform (Scotland) Bill be passed.
Submitted by: Shona Robison
Date lodged: Monday, 19 December 2022
Motion reference: S6M-07312
Current status: Taken in the Chamber on Thursday, 22 December 2022
Result
86 for, 39 against, 0 abstained, 4 did not vote
Agreed
See further details of the motion
Parliament decided to pass the Bill
Final version of the Bill
Gender Recognition Reform (Scotland) Bill as passed (2MB, pdf) posted 22 December 2022
The Bill ended Stage 3 on 22 December 2022
What's next?
Section 35 Order
On 17 January 2023, the then Secretary of State for Scotland (Alister Jack) made an Order under section 35 of the Scotland Act 1998 preventing the Presiding Officer from submitting the Bill for Royal Assent. This means that the Bill cannot become law in its current form.
The Secretary of State’s reasons for making this are set out in schedule 2 of the Order.
Ministerial Statements
Gender Recognition Reform (Scotland) Bill: Section 35 Order - 19 April 2023
Section 35 Order Judicial Review - 20 December 2023
Copyright
Cookies
Data protection
Freedom of Information
Privacy
Careers
Accessibility
Diversity and inclusion
Lobbying
Complaints
Glossary
Code of Conduct
Standing Orders
Scottish Parliament TV
Online shop
© Scottish Parliament 2026