Andorra's prime minister Xavier Espot Zamora,comes out as gay About Us Advertise Work with us Login Register Latest News View all UK US World Health Politics Sport Business Culture View all TV Film Celebrity Drag Theatre Music Gaming Lifestyle View all Beauty Careers Fashion Relationships Travel Shopping View all Deals Recommended Fashion & Beauty Tickets Video View all News & Politics Entertainment Lifestyle Discover Trans Awareness Week Drag Race Explainers The Queer Agenda Toggle menu Account Register Login Europe Andorra’s prime minister, Xavier Espot Zamora, comes out as gay: ‘I never hid it’ Sep 12 2023 Written by Sophie Perry Share Save for later Comment Listen Xavier Espot Zamora has served as Andorra’s prime minister since 2019. (Georges Gobet/AFP via via Getty) Andorra’s prime minister, Xavier Espot Zamora, has come out as gay. Queer News. Straight Up. The LGBTQ+ stories you don’t want to miss, delivered to your inbox daily. Email address required Must be valid email Register By registering you agree to our Privacy Policy Thanks for registering! You can update your email subscriptions at any time in the My profile section of your account. In an interview with Radio and Television of Andorra , the country’s national broadcaster, the prime minister said: “[I] never hid it, Now, if I’m not asked I don’t have to say it either, in the sense that it doesn’t define the entirety of my person and even less of my personal politics. “But at the same time, I think it shouldn’t be a problem to express it. “And if this helps children, young people or teenagers – who are going through a difficult time – [to] see that in the end, regardless of their condition or sexual orientation, in this country you can prosper and reach the highest magistracy.” A former judge, Zamora took office in 2019 and oversees the country’s population of approximately 79,000. During the course of his premiership, Andorra has legalised marriage for same-sex couples, introduced anti-discrimination laws for gender identity or expression, and the right for trans people to change their legal gender. Dec 31 2024 Every celebrity who came out as LGBTQ+ in 2024 In the most recent ILGA-Europe Rainbow Map rankings, Andorra was ranked 24th out of Europe’s 49 countries on LGBTQ+ rights. However, conversion therapy has not been outlawed and non-binary identities are not legally recognised. Zamora is not the first LGBTQ+ leader in Europe. In July, Latvia swore in Edgars Rinkēvičs , its first openly gay president. “During my presidency, I will stand up for the creation of a modern and strong Latvia, for a legal and just Latvia, for the wellbeing of the people, for an inclusive and respectful society,” he said in his inaugural address. “It is possible for all of us to achieve this by working together.” Ireland’s Leo Varadkar , who has served as taoiseach since December, is also openly gay. “It’s not something that defines me,” said Vardkar, who also held office between 2017 and 2020. “I’m not a half-Indian politician, or a doctor politician or a gay politician for that matter. It’s just part of who I am, it doesn’t define me, it is part of my character, I suppose.” Ana Brnabić, who took office in 2017, is Serbia’s first female and first openly gay prime minister. And Xavier Bettel , the prime minister of Luxembourg, has been in office since 2013. He married architect Gauthier Destenay in 2015 – the same year same-sex marriage was legalised in the country. More: Andorra Xavier Espot Zamora Please login or register to comment on this story. Related articles Politics Jan 09 2024 Every out LGBTQ world leader to date as France appoints first gay prime minister Europe May 31 2023 Latvia elects Edgars Rinkevics as president – the first openly gay head of state in Europe News Jul 05 2021 Luxembourg’s trailblazing gay prime minister Xavier Bettel admitted to hospital with COVID UK Sep 16 2019 Boris Johnson is being ridiculed after skipping press conference with Luxembourg’s gay prime minister News Sep 11 2019 Gay prime minister of Luxembourg in historic photograph with lesbian prime minister of Serbia Latest News Previous Next Celebrity Sep 25 Trans influencer calls out Nikki Glaser for stand-up joke about what’s ‘in her pants’ Culture Sep 25 Trans pro wrestling trailblazer Gisele Shaw signs exclusive NWA contract Bisexual Sep 25 The Traitors star Freddie Fraser’s mum’s emotional response to his coming out Celebrity Sep 25 Lili Reinhart says Hollywood ‘too afraid’ to greenlight lesbian vampire project Celebrity Sep 25 Carly Rae Jepsen describes moment Heated Rivalry inspired her son’s name Celebrity Sep 25 John Green ‘heartbroken’ for trans Harry Potter fans as he talks JK Rowling Current Affairs Sep 25 JD Vance claims James Talarico has a “weird obsession with children in drag” News Sep 25 Susan Sarandon, Hannah Einbinder and Caleb Hearon detained outside UN after protesting Netanyahu What to buy now Previous Next Fashion Mar 27 Connor Ives and MAC team up to re-release the iconic ‘Protect The Dolls’ t-shirt Music Mar 12 The Pussycat Dolls confirm reunion with new single and tour – how to get tickets Music Jan 23 A full guide to the 2026 Harry Styles Together, Together tour including dates and presale info Shopping Nov 24 2025 Ten truly awesome Christmas gifts you can buy to support queer-owned businesses Trans Sep 09 2025 Lush creates ‘luxurious’ trans flag bath bomb to support trans charities Tickets Jun 25 2025 Dolly Parton announces mini Las Vegas residency after wrapping her last tour almost a decade ago Shopping May 15 2025 LEGO celebrates late gay icon Keith Haring with new art set: ‘Want this so bad’ Music Apr 18 2025 Primavera Sound’s most iconic queer performances, from Troye Sivan to Ethel Cain Exclusive Previous Next Exclusive Sep 11 Ania Magliano talks SNL UK season two and anti-LGBTQ voices in comedy: ‘We do edgy in the right way’ Exclusive Sep 11 Elliot Tuttle on Blue Film’s personal inspiration, rejection and taboo: ‘It’s about loneliness’ Exclusive Sep 09 OF star Andy Lee on love for gay fans, ‘poisonous’ creators and ‘harmful’ stunts: ‘Gay men lift me up every day’ Exclusive Sep 07 Real Housewives of London spill the tea: ‘She’d go to the opening of a packet of crisps’ Opinion Sep 04 Katseye in London: A showcase of real talent deserving of the deafening screams Exclusive Sep 02 Adrian Chiarella and Joe Bird on tackling conversion therapy in gay horror Leviticus Exclusive Aug 21 Sziget Festival drag and circus troupe want audiences to feel like family Exclusive Aug 20 Gay wrestler Anthony Bowens says Heated Rivalry shows authentic life of closeted athletes Register to save articles and more. It'll only take a minute and it's free. JOIN US TODAY! Already have an account? Log in here "/> Download the PinkNews app Award winning LGBTQ+ journalism About us Editorial Policy Contact us Advertise Work for us Terms and conditions Privacy policy Privacy manager Privacy Manager