ANNUAL REVIEW OF THE HUMAN RIGHTS SITUATION OF LESBIAN, GAY, BISEXUAL, TRANS, AND INTERSEX PEOPLE
COVERING THE PERIOD OF JANUARY TO DECEMBER 2024

SLOVENIA
ASYLUM

Slovenian courts have made notable progress in recognising the
vulnerabilities of LGBTI asylum seekers, granting refugee status
to individuals persecuted for their sexual orientation or gender
identity, according to a report by Ljubljana Pride Association.
However, challenges persist, such as inadequate data collection,
late disclosure, and the lack of tailored support. Many LGBTI
refugees continue to face inadequate healthcare, unsafe housing,
and discriminatory practices in Slovenia.

BIAS-MOTIVATED SPEECH
In April, the Ethics Commission of Journalists ruled that journalist
Rok Blažič violated the Code of Journalists of Slovenia in a
series of articles published in 2023. According to the Ethics
Commission, Blažič misleadingly portrayed gender reassignment
as a commercialised and harmful practice.
In April, the two largest opposition parties in Slovenia, SDS and
NSi, recently submitted a proposal to amend the Criminal Act to
criminalise the promotion of homosexuality and trans identities,
with penalties of up to three years in prison. The proposal
mirrored similar laws seen in Hungary, Bulgaria, Georgia, Belarus,
and Russia. However, the current government swiftly rejected
the initiative, citing its incompatibility with human rights and
democratic principles.
In June, a special edition of the magazine ‘Demokracija’ was
published under the provocative title ‘LGBT+ Ideology: Genocide
of Childhood’, featuring 76 pages primarily focused on anti-trans
narratives.
In September, the second-largest opposition party, NSi,
submitted a proposal to the Ministry of Health to remove genderaffirming surgery costs from coverage under compulsory health
insurance. As of now, the government has not yet responded to
the proposal.

BIAS-MOTIVATED VIOLENCE
In 2023, the Legebitra Society received 26 reports through its
website Niprav.si, which serves as a platform for reporting hate
crimes and hate speech. These reports were submitted both
anonymously and with contact information, with some individuals
also requesting further assistance from the Society’s legal team.
During the Pride celebrations in Maribor, the employees of a
bookstore, were subjected to various instances of verbal and
physical abuse after hanging a LGBTI flag over the entrance.
The director of the bookstore reported strangers spitting on the
flag, attempting to forcibly remove it, performing Nazi salutes,
and even going as far as threatening the staff with scissors
Back to index <-->

and physical force. The bookstore’s director accused the police
of inadequate action and reported that a police patrol blamed
the employees for the abuse they endured and suggested the
bookstore should remove the flag to avoid further incidents.
In June, Ljubljana Pride Festival 2024, marked the 40th
anniversary of the LGBTI movement in Slovenia, ending with the
Pride March. It was marked by several hate-motivated incidents,
The attacks included theft and desecration of rainbow flags,
harassment, and physical assaults. Notably, eggs were thrown
at participants, and perpetrators uploaded footage online with
threatening commentary. Despite the establishment of two
on-site points for reporting incidents or attacks, marking more
effective collaboration with the police compared to the 2023
march, the police were criticised for their inaction and reluctance
to register complaints or take adequate protective measures.
In Koper, a trans woman and her mother were subjected to a
violent attack, with the assailant chasing them until they were
able to find refuge in a nearby bar. They remained there until the
police arrived to ensure their safety.
In October and November, the Mariborka bookstore in Maribor
was targeted in two LGBTI-phobic attacks. Graffiti and hateful
messages were sprayed on the bookstore’s door, drainpipe, and
other areas, including the phrase “SMRT PEDROM” (Death to Fags),
and stickers with slogans promoting intolerance.

INSTITUTIONAL SUPPORT
In June, Deputy Mayor Dejan Crnek and Minister of Labor Luka
Mesec joined 5,000 participants for the yearly Pride march in
Ljubljana.
In July, the Ljubljana City Council approved a proposal to name
a new park after Ada Škerl and Sonja Plaskan, making it the first
park in Slovenia dedicated to a same-sex couple.

HUMAN RIGHTS DEFENDERS
Bogdan Lešnik, a prominent Slovenian psychologist, humanist,
and LGBTI activist known for his contribution to the creation of a
grassroots LGBTI movement in Slovenia, passed away at the age
of 73.

LEGAL GENDER RECOGNITION
The Ministry of Health officially confirmed its agreement with
the Interdisciplinary Council for Gender Recognition, stating that
medical treatment is not required for legal gender recognition.
As a result, the Ministry has formally requested the Ministry of
Internal Affairs to amend the relevant sub-article of the Civil
Registry Act.

SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE RIGHTS
Two initiatives were submitted to the Constitutional Court’s
constitutional review concerning sexual and reproductive rights.
The first concerned equal access to assisted reproductive
procedures for lesbian couples, while the second concerned the
access for single women to the same services.
In November, the Constitutional Court of Slovenia ruled that
certain provisions of the Act on Infertility Treatment and
Biomedically Assisted Fertilisation (OBMP) are unconstitutional.
Specifically, the court found that limiting access to OBMP
procedures to single women and women in same-sex relationships
violated the constitution. The court has given the country one year
to address the non-compliance and amend the law accordingly.

PARTICIPATION IN PUBLIC, CULTURAL, AND
POLITICAL LIFE
At the Museum of contemporary history and in the Museum of the
city of Ljubljana, two exhibitions were set up in honour of the 40th
anniversary of the creation of the LGBTI movement in Slovenia.


MORE INFORMATION ON WWW.ILGA-EUROPE.ORG
Back to index <-->

