Bangladesh: 5 trans women arrested for begging Now Reading Bangladesh: 5 trans women arrested for begging Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate Bangladesh: 5 trans women arrested for begging by Colin Stewart April 22, 2024 Colin Stewart Colin Stewart is a 45-year journalism veteran living in Southern… Read Next Dominica court overturns anti-sodomy law LGBT activists call for release of trans women Five trans hijras in custody, with police officer at left. (Photo courtesy of JMBF) Bangladesh newspapers have reported on five transgender/hijra people who were arrested while begging in the area of the Hazrat Shahjalal International Airport in Dhaka, and sentenced to one month for “extortion” and “public disturbance.” While the exact circumstances of their arrests are unclear, JusticeMakers Bangladesh in France (JMBF), an LGBT advocacy group, has issued the following statement condemning the arrests and calling for justice and security for LGBT people in Bangladesh. Statement from JusticeMakers Bangladesh in France: JusticeMakers Bangladesh in France (JMBF) strongly condemns the recent conviction and imprisonment of five individuals from the transgender/third gender/hijra community on charges of extortion and public disturbance at Hazrat Shahjalal International Airport in Dhaka on April 6. France-based Rights Organization JMBF believes that this action will exacerbate the marginalization of an already vulnerable group in society and perpetuate harmful stereotypes while failing to address the root causes of their alleged behavior and activities. According to reports in Bangladeshi newspapers, on the afternoon of April 6, 2024, Babli (24), Apu Akhtar (30), Rhea Chakraborty (18), Kaya Moni (24), and Ranu Mondal (18) were convicted and sentenced to one month of imprisonment by a mobile court for extortion and public disturbance in the airport area. [Editor’s note: Exactly what happened at the airport is unclear.] Bangladeshi human rights lawyer Shahanur Islam. Advocate Shahanur Islam, Founder President of JusticeMakers Bangladesh in France, demands the immediate release of Babli, Apu Akhtar, Rhea Chakraborty, Kaya Moni, and Ranu Mondal, and also urges authorities to ensure fair treatment and equal rights for all individuals regardless of their gender identity. See Also Homosexuality is now illegal in 66 nations JMBF asserts that using the law to target and punish individuals based on their gender identity is unacceptable and violates the principles of equality and human dignity. It is imperative to address the underlying discrimination and provide support and protection to all members of the transgender community. Discrimination and prejudice have no place in modern society, and the government must work to create a more inclusive and just environment for all. JMBF calls upon the government to pass and enact legislation protecting sexual minority individuals, as well as to repeal Article 377 of the penal code promptly. JMBF remains vigilant in monitoring this incident and stands in solidarity with the victims and all sexual minority individuals in Bangladesh. You can read the full JMBF statement here . Related reporting from Erasing 76 Crimes: Bangladesh activists demand action after trans person murdered LGBTQ rights activists denounce detention of 4 lesbians in Bangladesh Two lesbian girls arrested in Bangladesh Another gay man murdered in Bangladesh. Activists demand justice. JusticeMakers Bangladesh calls for justice after transgender person murdered Bangladesh: Appeal for change after trans woman’s murder Colin Stewart April 22, 2024 The Latest Posts Turkey’s anti-LGBT crackdown expands; activists fight back Proposed Ukraine law would expand ban on anti-LGBTQ discrimination A third of LGBTQ groups say 2025’s drastic cuts will force them to close Bangladesh activists launch petition to end anti-LGBTQ discrimination Uganda’s ‘Not Free’ rating partly due to anti-LGBT laws Appeal to Indonesia to stop listing ‘LGBTQ culture’ as a national threat LGBTI+ rights activists in Turkey seek international support during crackdown Analysis: Cameroon’s anti-gay raids violated Cameroon’s own rules Ghana’s £10m deal is dead; gay fans won’t be lured to homophobic nation Turkey: 162 targeted in anti-LGBTQ+ raids Tanzanian LGBTQ+ activists map the road ahead Previous Article Dominica court overturns anti-sodomy law Next Article View Comments (0) Leave a Reply Cancel reply Your email address will not be published. Name * E-mail * Website Notify me of new posts by email. Δ Related Posts Bangladesh activists launch petition to end anti-LGBTQ discrimination Murder suspected in death of sexual minority leader in Bangladesh ‘My son is trans. So what?’ says Ghana commentator KKD Bangladesh students expelled over homosexuality allegations Cameroon’s LGBTI community in peril as leaders flee Russia designates North Caucasus women and queer rights group ‘extremist’ About The Erasing 76 Crimes news site covers the human toll of 66+ countries’ anti-gay laws and the struggle to repeal them. Member Members of the African Human Rights Media Network publish news articles and other media that educate readers about sexual minorities’ struggle for recognition of their human rights. Partner The St. Paul’s Foundation for International Reconciliation promotes LGBTQ+ rights through fact-based advocacy journalism and community projects. (California charity 80-0647355) © 2026 Erasing 76crimes. All rights reserved. Scroll To Top Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate Facebook Twitter Instagram Discover more from Erasing 76 Crimes Subscribe now to keep reading and get access to the full archive. Type your email… Subscribe Continue reading PRESS ESC TO CLOSE