European court finds Latvia failed to protect victim of homophobic attack court finds loading... About Us Get involved Movement Building Advocacy Rainbow Map News Donate search About Us Toggle submenu back Who we are Toggle submenu back Our Constitution Standing Orders Annual reports Strategic plans How we’re funded Membership Team Work with us Media Centre Contacts Get involved Movement Building Toggle submenu back Our Annual Conference How we support the movement Our resource sharing centre How we fund the movement How we work with funders Our current programmes Advocacy Toggle submenu back Bodily Integrity Civil Rights and Freedom Health Inclusion and Equality Legal Protection Safety Rainbow Map News Facebook Instagram Youtube Vimeo LinkedIn TikTok Bluesky Threads Share Latvia failed to protect human rights of victim of a homophobic attack, european Court finds 30.07.2024 News Legal Protection European Court of Human Rights Latvia Strategic Litigation scroll The European Court of Human rights has made a judgement in a case where the Latvian authorities declined to prosecute an anti-LGBTI attack as a hate-motivated offence Earlier this month, in the case of Hanovs v. Latvia taken by the victim of a homophobic assault, the European Court found a violation of Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights (prohibition of torture and inhuman or degrading treatment) and Article 8 (right to private and family life), together with Article 14 (prohibition of discrimination). The case concerned the attack on the applicant and his partner, a gay couple, when they were walking in Riga. The two perpetrators of the attack shouted homophobic slurs and physically assaulted the applicant. The applicant avoided further violence by fleeing into a shop and securing the door. The police and prosecutors declined to prosecute the attack on the applicant as a hate-motivated offence. The Court found that the authorities had failed to offer adequate protection in respect of the individual applicant’s dignity and private life by ensuring effective prosecution of the attack against him, and to effectively investigate the hate motive behind the attack. Importantly, the Court considered that “ attacks on LGBTI individuals, triggered by expressions of affection constitute an affront to human dignity ” so that the attack “ not only undermine [d] the victims’ physical safety but also their emotional and psychological well-being, turning a moment of intimacy into one of fear and trauma .” Furthermore, the Court ruled that such attacks “ humiliate and debase the victims, conveying a message of inferiority of their identities and expressions .” As such, the case fell within the scope of Article 3 of the Convention (inhumane and degrading treatment). The Court also pointed out the crucial importance of addressing impunity in cases of hate crimes as “ failure to address such incidents can normalise hostility towards LGBTI individuals, perpetuate a culture of intolerance and discrimination and encourage further acts of a similar nature .” Welcoming the judgement, ILGA-Europe’s Senior Strategic Litigation Officer, Marie-Hélène Ludwig said: “This judgment sends a strong signal in recalling State’s positive obligations in effectively addressing hate crimes against LGBTI people in Latvia and across Council of Europe member States amidst the rise in hate incidents in a number of countries.” The judgment can be accessed here . See also Report 16.07.2026 Inventory of relevant SOGIESC case law and pending cases before the ECtHR and CJEU 2025/2026 Update ILGA-Europe has been publishing an inventory of relevant SOGIESC (sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression and sex characteristics) case law and pending cases before the […] read more News 20.03.2026 Poland: Supreme Administrative Court confirms EU law obligation to recognise same-sex marriages concluded abroad On 20 March 2026, Poland’s Supreme Administrative Court issued a landmark ruling implementing an earlier CJEU judgment and confirming that the refusal to transcribe same-sex […] read more News 12.03.2026 Landmark CJEU ruling demands Member States to ensure legal gender recognition to guarantee freedom of movement Today’s judgment by the Court of Justice of the EU (CJEU) says all member states must provide for legal gender recognition procedures allowing their citizens […] read more Blog 05.12.2025 Q&A: Everything you want to know about the recent ruling on recognition of same-sex marriages in the EU Here is a concise overview of what the new Court of Justice of the EU (CJEU) ruling means for same sex couples moving or living […] read more News 25.11.2025 We welcome the EU’s Top Court landmark judgment: Member States Must Recognise Same-Sex Marriages from Other EU Countries The EU Court of Justice has ruled that it is unlawful for Poland to refuse to recognise a same-sex marriage concluded by two Polish citizens […] read more Press Release 23.10.2025 From Courtrooms to Parliament: Lithuania Faces a Defining Moment for Family Equality Lithuania is entering a decisive phase in the recognition and protection of diverse families. Following landmark judicial rulings, civil partnership is now firmly on the […] read more News 09.09.2025 Joint Statement: Landmark CJEU opinion demands legal gender recognition across EU A new opinion from Advocate General of the Court of Justice of the European Union says all member states must recognise the lived gender of […] read more News 07.08.2025 French Court orders end to mandatory gender titles on train tickets The ruling follows a CJEU judgment and marks a major step for data protection and gender inclusivity in the EU. France’s Supreme Administrative Court (Conseil […] read more News 17.07.2025 Joint statement welcoming European court’s ruling against Poland over anti-gay hate crime The European Court of Human Rights has issued a judgement against Poland for failing to properly investigate and prosecute a homophobic attack against a gay […] read more News Press Release 10.07.2025 Semenya v. Switzerland: Grand Chamber of the European Court of Human Rights Judgment Joint press release of the third-party interveners Today, 10 July 2025, in a pivotal judgment, the Grand Chamber of the European Court of Human Rights […] read more Blog 20.06.2025 Against the odds: progress for LGBTI rights in Europe While setbacks for LgbtI rights have dominated the headlines from this year’s Rainbow Map, a quieter story of resilience and progress is unfolding. In the […] read more Press Release 12.06.2025 European Court rules Czech Republic violated trans rights with forced sterilisation In a pivotal judgment delivered today, the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) has found that the Czech Republic violates the rights of trans people […] read more Press Release 05.06.2025 Pride Ban Must Not Go Ahead as EU Advocate General Confirms Hungary’s ‘Child Protection Law’ Breaches EU Law In a major development, Advocate General of Europe’s top court has issued an opinion considering Hungary’s anti-LGBTI legislation to be in breach of EU law, […] read more News 26.05.2025 What the CJEU AG’s Opinion in the infringement case against Hungary means for LGBTI equality in the EU The CJEU Advocate General has just delivered her Opinion in the Commission v Hungary “EU values” infringement case (C-769/22) – a major CJEU case on […] read more News 03.04.2025 CJEU Advocate General: Member States Must Recognise Same-Sex Marriages from Other EU Countries An opinion from the EU Court of Justice’s Advocate General states that Member States must recognise same-sex marriages performed in other EU countries to ensure […] read more Report 20.03.2025 Inventory of relevant SOGIESC case law and pending cases before the ECtHR and CJEU 2025 In order to focus our strategic litigation efforts across Europe to fully protect and advance LGBTI rights, with this inventory ILGA-Europe wants to support members […] read more News 13.03.2025 Joint statement welcoming EU’s top court judgment to correct a trans man’s gender identity data in national registry Today, the European Court of Justice (CJEU) issued a judgment in the case of Deldits (C-247/23), stating that national authorities responsible for keeping public registers […] read more News 05.03.2025 European court rules teacher’s dismissal over gay blog violated free speech The European Court of Human Rights rendered a judgement in a case where the Polish authorities fired a school teacher for writing on a blog […] read more News 13.02.2025 Joint statement welcoming judgement on Russia’s failure to protect the privacy of personal data ILGA-Europe and the AIRE Centre welcome the judgement from the European Court of Human Rights in the case of Bazhenov and others v. Russia Last […] read more News 09.01.2025 Joint statement welcoming CJEU judgment to halt unlawful gender title collection The EU Court of Justice has judged that it is unlawful for France’s national railway company to force passengers to choose between ‘Mr’ and ‘Ms’ […] read more News 07.01.2025 Joint statement on today’s long-awaited judgment from the European Court of Human Rights on violations of LGBTI human rights in Armenia ILGA-Europe and TGEU celebrate the judgement of the European Court of Human Rights in the case of Minasyan and Others v. Armenia, upholding the rights […] read more News 19.12.2024 Lithuanian Court Declares anti-LGBTI law unconstitutional In a significant decision yesterday, Lithuania’s Constitutional Court ruled that a 15-year long ban on public depictions of LGBTI families should be repealed. The Constitutional […] read more News 13.12.2024 Russia failed to respond adequately to politician’s homophobic verbal assault, European Court finds The European Court of Human Rights has found that Russia’s failure to respond adequately to homophobic verbal assault and physical threats by a politician against […] read more News 04.12.2024 Top European Court holds hearing on Polish refusal to recognise same-sex marriage certificate Case could establish critical precedent for the freedom of movement of same-sex couples within the EU Yesterday, the Court of Justice of the European Union […] read more News 04.10.2024 Joint statement: EU Court of Justice strengthens trans rights by calling for the automatic recognition in birth certificates ACCEPT, TGEU and ILGA-Europe welcome today’s decision of the Court of Justice of the EU (CJEU) said that the refusal of an EU Member State […] read more News 19.09.2024 Joint statement: Welcoming European Court judgement on Poland’s failure to protect same-sex couples married abroad The European Court of Human Rights has found that Poland breached the right to respect for the family life of two same-sex Polish couples married […] read more News 12.09.2024 Joint statement: EU Court of Justice Advocate General calls on Hungary to correct trans refugee’s gender marker in national registries Háttér Society, ILGA-Europe and TGEU welcome an opinion from the Advocate General of the Court of Justice of the European Union stating that Hungarian immigration […] read more News 01.08.2024 Joint statement on Italian Constitutional Court ruling on non-binary & trans persons’ rights ILGA-Europe and TGEU welcome a judgement of the Italian Constitutional Court finding that non-binary peoples’ rights are protected under the Italian Constitution In a judgment […] read more News 26.07.2024 Joint Statement: Human rights groups regret outcome of European Court ruling on France’s criminalisation policies in relation to sex work On 25 July, the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) ruled in M.A. and Others v. France that there has been no violation of Article […] read more News 17.07.2024 Trans woman should have been allowed access to hormone therapy in prison, says European Court The European Court of Human Rights has found that Poland violated Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights, protecting the right to private […] read more Subscribe to our newsletter Subscribe Highlights Who we are Team Work with us Annual Conference 2026 Rainbow Map News Contacts We are always open to hearing from you, whether it’s to find out more information about an aspect of our work, for a media enquiry, or to ask a question about our organisation. Click here for the form to contact us. Co-funded by the European Union. Views and opinions expressed are however those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union or of the granting authority. Neither the European Union nor the granting authority can be held responsible for them. ILGA-Europe gratefully acknowledge support from: Facebook Instagram Youtube Vimeo LinkedIn TikTok Bluesky Threads Copyright 2026 ILGA-Europe Powered by SOLOS Privacy policy loading...