Focus on anti-LGBTI stance of Kuwait, Kiribati Now Reading Focus on anti-LGBTI stance of Kuwait, Kiribati Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate Focus on anti-LGBTI stance of Kuwait, Kiribati by Colin Stewart August 7, 2015 Colin Stewart Colin Stewart is a 45-year journalism veteran living in Southern… Read Next Many help pro-LGBTI Gambian avoid anti-LGBTI homeland During the past year, Kuwait and tiny Kiribati were urged to improve their treatment of LGBTI citizens. That advice came when each of those countries’ human rights records came in for review by other United Nations members. Such reviews focus on dozens of countries each year as part of the U.N.’s Universal Periodic Review (UPR) process, which scrutinizes each country’s human rights record every four years. Excerpts below were compiled from the 21st UPR session by the U.N. Human Rights Council: Kuwait Kuwait’s location on the Persian Gulf Five nations urged Kuwait to revise its policies toward LGBTI people. Only Iceland and Uruguay bothered asking Kuwait to repeal its anti-homosexuality law. Iceland said that Kuwait should stop arresting individuals based on their sexual orientation, gender identity or appearance and repeal legislative measures that criminalize consensual homosexual conduct. Uruguay advised adopting “the necessary measures to eliminate in the legislation and in practice the crimes motivated by the sexual orientation of persons.” Three other nations proposed anti-discrimination laws: Adopt a general law that sanctions discrimination for any reason, in particular against women and lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) persons (Chile). Prepare and adopt legal and administrative measures with a view to investigating and prosecuting acts of discrimination, stigmatization and violence against LGBTI persons (Argentina). Guarantee personal autonomy and individual rights, as enshrined in the Constitution, by a prohibition of discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity, as well as by allowing a medical gender change to be reflected in a person’s identity documents (Netherlands). Kuwait did not respond to those recommendations. Kiribati See Also Under attack in Russia, trans support group still racks up successes Located in the central Pacific Ocean, Kiribati consists of dozens of small islands. Their total area is about 300 square miles, with a total population of about 100,000 people. (Map courtesy of Wikipedia) France, Slovenia and Chile urged the tiny island nation of Kiribati to decriminalize homosexuality. The Kiribati delegation made no response to those recommendations. The delegation did say that Kiribati is considering Uruguay’s advice to adopt legislation prohibiting all forms of discrimination of individuals, based on race, skin color, religion, national or ethnic origin, disability, aesthetic aspect, gender, sexual identity or orientation. For more information, read: The statement of the Office of the U.N. High Commissioner on Human Rights “Combatting discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity.” The High Commissioner’s report to the Human Rights Council on discrimination and violence against individuals based on their sexual orientation and gender identity (May 2015) ( Summary or full report ) An analysis by ARC International of recent proceedings at the Human Rights Council titled “Denying the Rights of persons based on sexual orientation, gender identity and intersex status is challenging the universality of human rights” Excerpts of outcomes of the 21th UPR session compiled by the U.N. Committee on Conferences. Colin Stewart August 7, 2015 The Latest Posts Turkey’s anti-LGBT crackdown expands; activists fight back Proposed Ukraine law would expand ban on anti-LGBTQ discrimination A third of LGBTQ groups say 2025’s drastic cuts will force them to close Bangladesh activists launch petition to end anti-LGBTQ discrimination Uganda’s ‘Not Free’ rating partly due to anti-LGBT laws Appeal to Indonesia to stop listing ‘LGBTQ culture’ as a national threat LGBTI+ rights activists in Turkey seek international support during crackdown Analysis: Cameroon’s anti-gay raids violated Cameroon’s own rules Ghana’s £10m deal is dead; gay fans won’t be lured to homophobic nation Turkey: 162 targeted in anti-LGBTQ+ raids U.S. to Malaysia: Anti-gay law’s political victim needs doctor Previous Article Many help pro-LGBTI Gambian avoid anti-LGBTI homeland Next Article View Comments (3) jerbearinsantafe says: August 7, 2015 at 6:50 am Reblogged this on Fairy JerBear's Queer World News, Views & More From The City Different – Santa Fe, NM and commented: Two countries urged to change their anti-LGBTQIA laws… Reply Ted says: December 1, 2015 at 12:02 pm Could you please link to your sources for Kiribati? Thanks! Reply Colin Stewart says: December 1, 2015 at 1:11 pm As I recall, the information comes from the documents cited at the bottom of the file. This one, for example, includes Kiribati: An analysis by ARC International of recent proceedings at the Human Rights Council titled “Denying the Rights of persons based on sexual orientation, gender identity and intersex status is challenging the universality of human rights” Reply Leave a Reply Cancel reply Your email address will not be published. Name * E-mail * Website Notify me of new posts by email. Δ Related Posts Why LGBT rights activists oppose U.N. resolution against anti-LGBT laws Spotlight on Burundi, where the president wants gays to be stoned 2025 LGBTQ rights update: Mixed results in Oceania Malawi’s human rights advocates seek an end to anti-LGBT laws Trans people face violence across Middle East and North Africa, new report finds Niue: Tally of nations with anti-homosexuality laws drops to 65 About The Erasing 76 Crimes news site covers the human toll of 66+ countries’ anti-gay laws and the struggle to repeal them. Member Members of the African Human Rights Media Network publish news articles and other media that educate readers about sexual minorities’ struggle for recognition of their human rights. Partner The St. Paul’s Foundation for International Reconciliation promotes LGBTQ+ rights through fact-based advocacy journalism and community projects. (California charity 80-0647355) © 2026 Erasing 76crimes. All rights reserved. Scroll To Top Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate Facebook Twitter Instagram Discover more from Erasing 76 Crimes Subscribe now to keep reading and get access to the full archive. Type your email… Subscribe Continue reading PRESS ESC TO CLOSE