Recent killings of trans women prompt groups to push for LGBTQIA protection Follow Follow Follow Follow Follow DONATE Search for: a M Close Search for: Latest Stories Latest Stories National Sovereignty Civil & Political Rights Land Rights & Rural Development Indigenous Peoples Rights Labor & Trade Union Economic and Socio-Cultural Rights OFWs & Migration Environment & Climate Crisis Urban Poor & Right to Development Arts, Culture & Education Peace and Conflict Politics & Governance International Issues Gender Rights & Inclusivity Media Freedom & Free Expression In-Depth Commentary Commentary At Ground Level Balik-Tanaw Blood Rush Baliksaysay Bulatlat Perspective Kalibutan First Person Konteksto Opinion Lab Notes On the Fringes Question Everything Root Access Multimedia Multimedia Martin’s Purrspective Salungguhit Comics Teka Sandali This Week in People’s History Photo of the Week News in Pictures Street Shooter Photo Essay/Documentary Aparición Podcasts Special Archives Special Archives War on Drugs Palparan Jonas Burgos Hacienda Luisita and Agrarian Reform Morong 43 Ampatuan Massacre Anti-Terrorism Act COVID-19 Mary Jane Veloso Lumad Killings Human Rights Resources Advocacy and Campaigns Gender Rights & Inclusivity Recent killings of trans women prompt groups to push for LGBTQIA protection Kierra Apostol. (Contributed photo) by Dominic Gutoman Published on Jun 26, 2025 Last Updated on Jun 26, 2025 at 5:51 pm ADVERTISEMENT MANILA – An eighteen-year-old trans woman was found lifeless in a Cagayan province river this Monday, June 23, days after she was reported missing. The most recent victim was Kierra Apostol, formerly known as Gian Molina, a resident of Zone 7, Centro, Peñablanca and a business management student of Cagayan State University. Bahaghari, a Philippine alliance of LGBT organizations, said the incident is another harrowing case of violence against Filipino trans women. “Kierra could’ve been celebrating with her community in Cagayan this Pride month, but her life was cut short due to hate perpetuated by a macho-patriarchal culture,” Reyna Valmores Salinas said, Bahaghari chairperson said. In an interview with the local media 95.7 XFM Tuguegarao, the mother of the victim, Marinel Morina, said that her child asked for permission to sleep over at the home of a friend in the same town around 8:00 p.m. It was the last time Gian was seen alive and all attempts to contact her by phone since have failed. Kierra was feared missing when two of her friends visited their home to ask about her whereabouts on Sunday evening. Molinea reported the incident to the Peñablanca Police Station on Monday, June 23. The victim’s mother revealed visible signs of physical assault when the body was found floating in the river. A certain “Menco de Guzman” also surfaced in the course of investigation, later identified as “Sherwin Kyqle”, a criminology student at the University of Cagayan Valley. He voluntarily surrendered to the police station to clear his name after being mentioned in Facebook posts insinuating involvement. He admitted that he was the one who picked up Kierra on Saturday night but denied killing her. Sherwin said he was with two to three companions at the time of the supposed murder. Salinas said that the brutal killing is further proof that LGBTQ+ persons remain unsafe in the Philippines, calling for the immediate passage of a law against discrimination and violence. “Kierra’s case is an urgent reminder to pass the SOGIESC Equality Bill, which will provide legal remedies against acts of discrimination,” Salinas added. On June 23, a trans woman, former journalist and activist was killed by an unidentified gunman while inside an acupuncture clinic in General Santos. Ali Macalintal was a former deputy secretary general of Karapatan-Soccsksargen Region and a former anchor-reporter of Radio Philippines Network DXDX-General Santos City. Read: Groups denounce killing of former activist, journalist in GenSan Bahaghari also decried the killing of Macalintal. They also reported the killing of another trans woman, Shalani Dolina, in Caloocan earlier this year. Read: Brutal killing of trans woman in Caloocan prompts calls for investigation, passage of SOGIE bill No legislation to protect people from discrimination based on sexual orientation, gender identity and expression has been passed in the Philippines. The SOGIESC Equality Bill had been stuck in Congress in the past 25 years. The latest version of the SOGIE Equality Bill was filed by the Makabayan Bloc in 2022 as House Bill No. 5551 . In the Senate, the SOGIE Bill was filed as Senate Bill No. 1600 by senators Risa Hontiveros, Loren Legarda and Mark Villar. Read: After 25 years, SOGIESC Bill still awaits passage The proposed measures seek to prohibit refusal of admission or expulsion of a person from any educational or training institution open to the general public, denial of public and health services, infliction of physical harm, verbal abuse, among others against LGBT community members. (AMU, RBV) Save as PDF BE A BULATLAT PATRON A community of readers and supporters that help us sustain our operations through microdonations for as low as $1. SUBSCRIBE NOW ADVERTISEMENT 0 Comments Submit a Comment Cancel reply Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked * Comment * Name * Email * Website Submit Comment Dominic Gutoman Dominic Gutoman is hungry for new ideas and connections. As a community manager and a reporter, his energy overflows as his reaction to most things mundane or sublime. Dominic Gutoman Dominic Gutoman is hungry for new ideas and connections. As a community manager and a reporter, his energy overflows as his reaction to most things mundane or sublime. MORE FROM BULATLAT Not losing hope for 16 years, Mary Jane finally free Not losing hope for 16 years, Mary Jane finally free  Anne Marxze Umil |  Sep 27, 2026 Discord Discord  Danilo Arao |  Sep 26, 2026 Their many masks Their many masks  Dee Ayroso |  Sep 25, 2026 Faith groups push against US-backed ‘Pax Silica’ hub Faith groups push against US-backed ‘Pax Silica’ hub  Martha Teodoro |  Sep 25, 2026 Students rally on Martial Law commemoration despite arrest threats Students rally on Martial Law commemoration despite arrest threats  Davao Today |  Sep 25, 2026 Gov’t grants Mary Jane Veloso absolute pardon after 16 years Gov’t grants Mary Jane Veloso absolute pardon after 16 years  Alyssa Mae Clarin |  Sep 25, 2026 Company seeks to evict Sebaring IP residents Company seeks to evict Sebaring IP residents  Bulatlat Contributors |  Sep 24, 2026 Budget cuts, red-tagging hound LSPU students Budget cuts, red-tagging hound LSPU students  Shan Kenshin Ecaldre |  Sep 24, 2026 About us | Community | Contact us | Syndication Policy | Privacy Policy | Subscribe Follow us on Follow Follow Follow Follow Follow © 2025 Bulatlat.com Pin It on Pinterest Share This Facebook X LinkedIn Like Print Friendly