MPs criticise Cayman Islands' draft constitution for omitting gay rights | PinkNews About Us Advertise Work with us Login Register Latest News View all UK US World Health Politics Sport Business Culture View all TV Film Celebrity Drag Theatre Music Gaming Lifestyle View all Beauty Careers Fashion Relationships Travel Shopping View all Deals Recommended Fashion & Beauty Tickets Video View all News & Politics Entertainment Lifestyle Discover Trans Awareness Week Drag Race Explainers The Queer Agenda Toggle menu Account Register Login Current Affairs MPs criticise Cayman Islands’ draft constitution for omitting gay rights Aug 11 2009 Written by PinkNews Staff Writer Share Save for later Comment A draft constitution for the Cayman Islands has been criticised by MPs for deliberately excluding gay rights. A report from the Foreign Affairs Committee described the decision to exclude sexual orientation as a prohibited ground for discrimination was “deplorable” and raised concerns that it breached human rights laws. The Cayman Islands are a British Overseas Territory and their foreign relations are largely managed from the United Kingdom. The report said: “We conclude that the deliberate omission of reference to sexual orientation as a prohibited ground for discrimination in the Cayman Islands draft constitution is deplorable. The possibility cannot be ruled out that the drafting of the constitution in this regard may result in Cayman Islands courts affording to citizens of those islands less than the full protection which they are entitled to under the European Convention on Human Rights.” It continued: “It is also clear that it was at the behest of the Islanders that explicit reference to sexual orientation was dropped from the Cayman Islands draft constitution. The FCO [Foreign and Commonwealth Office] argues that the list of grounds for discrimination is open-ended and thus does not exclude sexual orientation. However, the case-law on European Convention on Human Rights Article 14 is clear that sexual orientation is a ‘status’ and that differential treatment on that basis requires particularly weighty justification.” The committee looked at two draft constitutions; one for the Cayman Islands and another for St Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha. Both were found to contain references to Christian faith, with the Cayman Islands draft preamble proclaiming it “a God-fearing country based on traditional Christian values, tolerant of other religions and beliefs”. The report concluded: “We recommend that in all future discussions with Overseas Territories about revisions to their constitutions, the FCO insists that no specific religion or faith community be singled out for privileged mention, and that anti-discrimination provisions make explicit mention of sexual orientation.” Cayman Island residents currently enjoy one of the highest standards of living in the Caribbean region, aided by thriving tourism and banking industries. Homosexual acts between consenting adults were decriminalised in the Caymans by a UK Order in Council in December 2000. In the wake of an incident in which a gay man was detained by police on the Cayman Islands after kissing his boyfriend in public, there has been much discussion of gay rights in the territory. The Director of Tourism apologised to Aaron Chandler, an American visitor who was targeted and held by police in May 2008 for kissing his boyfriend. The 23-year-old American, on holiday with his partner, was detained by an off duty police officer and taken to a police station but not arrested. He was later released without charge. Queer News. Straight Up. The LGBTQ+ stories you don’t want to miss, delivered to your inbox daily. Email address required Must be valid email Register By registering you agree to our Privacy Policy Thanks for registering! You can update your email subscriptions at any time in the My profile section of your account. Dec 05 2022 26 LGBTQ+ couples we were rooting for but whose break-ups really, really hurt Related articles Culture Apr 21 57 celebrities you didn’t know are gay, bisexual or lesbian UK Aug 30 2022 Green Party Northern Ireland’s first gay leader on LGBTQ+ rights and nationalising energy World Jul 20 2022 Activists warn Russia expanding ‘gay propaganda’ law signals ‘heartbreaking’ turn on LGBTQ+ rights Law Jul 08 2022 Michael Cashman introduces bill to legalise same-sex marriage in British Overseas Territories UK Jul 01 2022 Scotland leaving UK would ‘create best possible future’ for LGBTQ+ rights, say pro-independence MPs Latest News Previous Next Celebrity Sep 25 Trans influencer calls out Nikki Glaser for stand-up joke about what’s ‘in her pants’ Culture Sep 25 Trans pro wrestling trailblazer Gisele Shaw signs exclusive NWA contract Bisexual Sep 25 The Traitors star Freddie Fraser’s mum’s emotional response to his coming out Celebrity Sep 25 Lili Reinhart says Hollywood ‘too afraid’ to greenlight lesbian vampire project Celebrity Sep 25 Carly Rae Jepsen describes moment Heated Rivalry inspired her son’s name Celebrity Sep 25 John Green ‘heartbroken’ for trans Harry Potter fans as he talks JK Rowling Current Affairs Sep 25 JD Vance claims James Talarico has a “weird obsession with children in drag” News Sep 25 Susan Sarandon, Hannah Einbinder and Caleb Hearon detained outside UN after protesting Netanyahu What to buy now Previous Next Fashion Mar 27 Connor Ives and MAC team up to re-release the iconic ‘Protect The Dolls’ t-shirt Music Mar 12 The Pussycat Dolls confirm reunion with new single and tour – how to get tickets Music Jan 23 A full guide to the 2026 Harry Styles Together, Together tour including dates and presale info Shopping Nov 24 2025 Ten truly awesome Christmas gifts you can buy to support queer-owned businesses Trans Sep 09 2025 Lush creates ‘luxurious’ trans flag bath bomb to support trans charities Tickets Jun 25 2025 Dolly Parton announces mini Las Vegas residency after wrapping her last tour almost a decade ago Shopping May 15 2025 LEGO celebrates late gay icon Keith Haring with new art set: ‘Want this so bad’ Music Apr 18 2025 Primavera Sound’s most iconic queer performances, from Troye Sivan to Ethel Cain Exclusive Previous Next Exclusive Sep 11 Ania Magliano talks SNL UK season two and anti-LGBTQ voices in comedy: ‘We do edgy in the right way’ Exclusive Sep 11 Elliot Tuttle on Blue Film’s personal inspiration, rejection and taboo: ‘It’s about loneliness’ Exclusive Sep 09 OF star Andy Lee on love for gay fans, ‘poisonous’ creators and ‘harmful’ stunts: ‘Gay men lift me up every day’ Exclusive Sep 07 Real Housewives of London spill the tea: ‘She’d go to the opening of a packet of crisps’ Opinion Sep 04 Katseye in London: A showcase of real talent deserving of the deafening screams Exclusive Sep 02 Adrian Chiarella and Joe Bird on tackling conversion therapy in gay horror Leviticus Exclusive Aug 21 Sziget Festival drag and circus troupe want audiences to feel like family Exclusive Aug 20 Gay wrestler Anthony Bowens says Heated Rivalry shows authentic life of closeted athletes Register to save articles and more. It'll only take a minute and it's free. JOIN US TODAY! Already have an account? Log in here "/> Download the PinkNews app Award winning LGBTQ+ journalism About us Editorial Policy Contact us Advertise Work for us Terms and conditions Privacy policy Privacy manager Privacy Manager