Gay marriage initiative proceeds to Parliament with 162,000 backers | Yle Skip to content Skip to content Etusivu Venäjän hyökkäys Iranin sota Sanapyramidi Elämäni Biisi Search Menu Haemme säätietoja... Search from Yle content Current topics Venäjän hyökkäys Iranin sota Sanapyramidi Elämäni Biisi Topics Etusivu Uutisia lyhyesti Tuoreimmat Lyhyet videot Urheilu Kulttuuri Paikallisuutiset Kotimaa Ulkomaat Politiikka Talous MOT Tiede Luonto Sää Kolumnit Oppiminen Abitreenit Elävä arkisto Selkouutiset Yle Areena. Series. Podcasts. Live broadcast. Teksti-TV Uutiskirjeet TV-opas Radio-opas RSS-syötteet Languages Svenska Sápmi News Новости Новини Uudizet karjalakse Yle Somaliga اولي عربي Uutiset viittomakielellä Lähetä uutiskuva tai ‑video Asiakas­palvelu Contact us Cookie preferences Close menu News Share News Top stories Latest About us More All Points North Radio Newsletter Presidential election Sport Weather Finland / Domestic Business Economy Society Working life Education Crime Technology Foreign policy History Politics Immigration Culture Nature Science Health Food Entertainment Travel Transport Climate Media The article is more than 13 years old Gay marriage initiative proceeds to Parliament with 162,000 backers The campaign has collected the largest number of backers of any citizens' initiative to date. Open image viewer Image: Yle 19.9.2013 7:51 • Updated 19.9.2013 8:01 A petition calling for the right to same-sex marriage in Finland has collected more than 162,000 signatures. The time allotted to gather names backing the civic initiative ends on Thursday. Organisers had hoped to attract a quarter-million names. Parliament must consider any such petition that garners at least 50,000 certified adult signatures in this nation of 5.4 million. The “Tahdon2013” (“I Do”) campaign surpassed that number on its first day last March. On Thursday, organisers of the campaign will release the results of a public opinion poll on the topic of gay marriage. In February, the parliamentary Legal Affairs Committee voted narrowly not to proceed with consideration of a marriage equality bill. Finland is the only Nordic country not to permit same-sex marriage, although it does allow registered partnerships. The only citizens' initiative so far to be debated in Parliament was one proposing a ban on fur farming, which more than 70,000 signatures. It was rejected by the legislature last spring. A citizens' initiative calling for more reasonable application of copyright law passed the 50,000 signature mark in July. Another one calling for a referendum on EU membership failed to collect enough names within the stipulated time frame. More on the subject: The package contains 3 links More on the subject Green MP’s rainbow tie raises hackles at celebration sitting Russia Published 2013 2013 Same-sex marriage backers seek a quarter-million signatures Published 2013 2013 Parliamentary committee narrowly blocks same-sex marriage Unisex Published 2013 2013 Sources: Yle Latest: paketissa on 10 artikkelia Latest News Video: This week in Finland, 25 September 2026 The week's stories included the army adapting to drone warfare, young women struggling with their mental health, teens guzzling energy drinks, and a rare Moomin mug fetching a record price. Domestic news 25.9. News Finnish ministry wants to hear about kids' social media habits from parents, guardians The survey is meant to help a ministerial working group find ways to reduce social media harms. Technology 25.9. News Finnish MP warns against politicians becoming "AI puppets" Use of the technology is increasingly evident in day-to-day politics, Left Alliance MP Anna Kontula says, including to write speeches delivered in parliament. Technology 25.9. News Finland's president urges Elon Musk to allow Ukraine use Starlink inside Russian territory Foreign policy 25.9. News Finland faces rising food and coffee prices, PTT forecast predicts Economy 25.9. News End of the road for Finland's travelling Tivoli carnival after 138 years Entertainment 25.9. News Unions call on ombudsman to investigate Wolt employment relationships Working life 24.9. News Central metro station faces 6-month closure as Helsinki approves West Harbour light-rail link Transport 24.9. News Video: Finland and Ukraine sign defence, security cooperation agreement Foreign policy 24.9. News Video: Finnish workers report high levels of work-related stress Working life 24.9. Show more Show more Most popular 1 Entertainment End of the road for Finland's travelling Tivoli carnival after 138 years 2 Economy Finland faces rising food and coffee prices, PTT forecast predicts 3 Transport Central metro station faces 6-month closure as Helsinki approves West Harbour light-rail link 4 Domestic news Video: This week in Finland, 25 September 2026 5 Technology Finnish ministry wants to hear about kids' social media habits from parents, guardians Latest 25.9. Domestic news Video: This week in Finland, 25 September 2026 25.9. Technology Finnish ministry wants to hear about kids' social media habits from parents, guardians 25.9. Technology Finnish MP warns against politicians becoming "AI puppets" 25.9. Foreign policy Finland's president urges Elon Musk to allow Ukraine use Starlink inside Russian territory 25.9. Economy Finland faces rising food and coffee prices, PTT forecast predicts 25.9. Entertainment End of the road for Finland's travelling Tivoli carnival after 138 years 24.9. Working life Unions call on ombudsman to investigate Wolt employment relationships 24.9. Transport Central metro station faces 6-month closure as Helsinki approves West Harbour light-rail link 24.9. Foreign policy Video: Finland and Ukraine sign defence, security cooperation agreement 24.9. Working life Video: Finnish workers report high levels of work-related stress 24.9. Sport Finland shock hosts Italy to reach European volleyball semi-final 24.9. Culture Rare Moomin mug sells for record-breaking €46k 23.9. Health Kela researcher on mental health gender gap: "the system reaches young women better" 23.9. Domestic news Supreme Court: Finnish police's forcible removals of hijabs from women was lawful 23.9. Working life Government promised 500 positions for young people in public sector, only 29 filled so far 23.9. Media Strong newspaper readership continues in Finland, survey shows 23.9. Business Video: Can Finnish fast food win over Italy? 23.9. Foreign policy 'Cooperation or conflict': Stubb's challenge to world at UN assembly 22.9. Society Boys' life expectancy in Finland reaches record 80 years 22.9. Domestic news Conscripts now sleep alone in the woods, not in tents Back to top Back to top About Yle Privacy statement Accessibility Cookie policy Careers Contact us