Same sex marriage cannot populate the world, the Governor General says. | SIBC Online Skip to content About SIBC Advertise With Us Have a Story? Contact Solomon Islands Broadcasting Corporation Voice of the Nation Listen live Home Top Headlines Politics National Business Health Environment Sport Pacific Features Podcasts Latest Government Same sex marriage cannot populate the world, the Governor General says. By admin 8 June 2018, 7:24 pm Share Governor General, Sir Frank Ofagioro Kabui. Photo: RSIPF. Solomon Islands ought to be aware of what is going on around us on the issue of same sex marriage or homosexuality. Governor General Sir Frank Ofagioro Kabui flagged the issue of same sex marriage during his speech marking Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth the Second’s 92nd birthday today. The queen’s country representative, Sir Frank said the issue of same sex marriage is coming and Solomon Islands must be prepared to deal with it. He said, today, gay and lesbian rights were creeping into schools in some countries. Some religion embrace it. Paraphrasing his research on same sex marriage, Sir Frank said being gay or homosexual is not the issue. Practicing it in private or openly with universal acceptance is the issue today. He said, Solomon Islands Penal Code is clearly against same sex marriage. Sir Frank said, with the changing times and the onslaught of homosexual promotion, the question for Solomon Islands was whether or not we would continue to maintain our current position or instead change our position and be like others. “Our challenge is to continue to remain steadfast against this onslaught, the international lesbian and gay advocates are steadfastly chipping at the edge with the hope that they change the world and accept same sex marriage, ” he said. ” Our Present criminal law, is against same sex marriage, sections 160, 161 and 162 of our penal code are the relevant prohibitions against same sex marriage, and associated conduct.” He said promoting same sex marriage is like changing the law of gravity by legislation. Sir Frank said same sex union cannot populate the world. Topics Government Honiara City People Solomon Islands Top Headlines Share Newsletter News to your inbox Get SIBC News by email, daily or weekly. Free, and you can unsubscribe any time. How often? Daily Every new story Weekly Top stories, once a week Email address Subscribe We'll email you a link. Your subscription starts once you click it. Advertise with us Reach thousands of Solomon Islanders every day Put your business beside the nation's news. See the spaces and prices, and ask us for a quote. More details Latest More → 1 MASI Osifelo humbled to take up PINA Vice President role 27 Sept 2026 2 Government SOLOMON ISLANDS DELEGATION BRINGS FIJI ROAD AND TRANSPORT LESSONS HOME 26 Sept 2026 3 United Nations Minister Maneniaru advocates stronger UN Women-partnership 26 Sept 2026 4 Feature “I Did This for My Parents” – Hazels Story 25 Sept 2026 5 Media MASI congratulates Osifelo on her election as Vice President of PINA 25 Sept 2026 6 Climate Change Minister Ghemu calls for urgent global action on sea-level rise 25 Sept 2026 More in Government More → Government SOLOMON ISLANDS DELEGATION BRINGS FIJI ROAD AND TRANSPORT LESSONS HOME 26 Sept 2026 Bilateral Partnership Hou, Wong Advance SI–Aust Treaty Discussions 22 Sept 2026 Bilateral Partnership SI, Ghana Forge New Diplomatic Partnership 22 Sept 2026 Commerce Commerce Ministry Outlines Key Sectors for 25,000 Jobs Target 19 Sept 2026 Solomon Islands Broadcasting Corporation The Solomon Islands Broadcasting Corporation is the national broadcaster of Solomon Islands, the Voice of the Nation. [email protected] Sections Top Headlines Politics National Business Health Environment Sport Pacific Features Podcasts SIBC About SIBC Our vision Wantok FM programmes Personalities Public notices Advertise with us Contact Newsletter © 2026 Solomon Islands Broadcasting Corporation. All rights reserved. RSS feed