4 anti-gay arrests in Senegal as 2019 election approaches Now Reading 4 anti-gay arrests in Senegal as 2019 election approaches Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate 4 anti-gay arrests in Senegal as 2019 election approaches by Colin Stewart September 24, 2018 Colin Stewart Colin Stewart is a 45-year journalism veteran living in Southern… Read Next Police bludgeon Cameroon cross-dresser for staying silent A wave of politically motivated anti-gay arrests is under way in Senegal. Senegal’s location in Africa. The latest LGBT people arrested were two women and two men, detained in Dakar, the capital of Senegal, for “acts against the order of nature.” According to reports, videos portraying the couples having sex had begun circulating in their neighborhood. The arrest came shortly after the conviction in early September of a local chef , Cheikh Abdel Kalifa Karaboué, for drugging and raping a male co-worker. He was sentenced to four years in prison for rape and sexual acts “against nature.” Grassroots activists said anti-gay arrests have grown as presidential elections approach. Senegal President Macky Sall is up for re-election next year. Senegal President Macky Sall (Photo courtesy of Wikipedia) The LGBT rights group Arc en Ciel Senegal said that the regime is building its defenses against potential accusations of being “pro-homosexual.” “The hunt for sexual minorities begins,” wrote Arc en Ciel Senegal, “because the government is preparing to answer those who call them ‘pro-homosexual’ as was the case in the 2016 referendum.” The group added, “Young people really need training and support to deal with these threats.” See Also LGBT people imprisoned amid post-election unrest in Cameroon Pan Africa ILGA stated: “As the elections in Senegal approach, parties are making their stand against the LGBTIQ+ community by arresting members of the community. The Senegalese candidates and government need to be held accountable for their homophobic stance and the human rights violations being perpetrated as a platform for election. We stand in solidarity with our Senegalese comrades.” This article includes information from ILGA’s LGBulleTIn . Related articles: Senegal politician seeks explicit law against homosexuality ( May 2016, 76crimes.com) Homophobic student mob riots and attacks gay man in Senegal (March 2016, Mamba Online) Senegal jails seven men for ‘being gay’ (August 2015, BBC) Senegal’s anti-gay law sends journalist back to prison (August 2015, 76crimes.com) Senegal Prosecutes LGBT Persons (August 2015, Freedom House) After mob attack, Senegal blocks gay-themed art show (June 2014, 76crimes.com) Senegal art show to feature LGBT Africans (April 2014, 76crimes.com) Police block anti-gay violence in Senegal (February 2014, 76crimes.com) Senegal prison sentence for gay couple; how rare? (February 2014, 76crimes.com) Appeal to Senegal to release 5 alleged lesbians (November 2013, 76crimes.com) Senegal police arrest 5 alleged lesbians (November 2013, 76crimes.com) Senegal leader rejects repeal of anti-gay laws (April 2013, 76crimes.com) Colin Stewart September 24, 2018 The Latest Posts Turkey’s anti-LGBT crackdown expands; activists fight back Proposed Ukraine law would expand ban on anti-LGBTQ discrimination A third of LGBTQ groups say 2025’s drastic cuts will force them to close Bangladesh activists launch petition to end anti-LGBTQ discrimination Uganda’s ‘Not Free’ rating partly due to anti-LGBT laws Appeal to Indonesia to stop listing ‘LGBTQ culture’ as a national threat LGBTI+ rights activists in Turkey seek international support during crackdown Analysis: Cameroon’s anti-gay raids violated Cameroon’s own rules Ghana’s £10m deal is dead; gay fans won’t be lured to homophobic nation Turkey: 162 targeted in anti-LGBTQ+ raids Russian Pride: QueerFest celebrates 10th year — peacefully Previous Article Police bludgeon Cameroon cross-dresser for staying silent Next Article View Comments (0) Leave a Reply Cancel reply Your email address will not be published. Name * E-mail * Website Notify me of new posts by email. Δ Related Posts Senegal Police admit using anal exams on female suspects Senegal women subjected to degrading anal examinations Are Senegal’s intersex people collateral victims of LGBTphobia? Senegal releases 28 of 99 men arrested on gay sex charges Why LGBT rights activists oppose U.N. resolution against anti-LGBT laws Senegal police arrest 8 suspected lesbians About The Erasing 76 Crimes news site covers the human toll of 66+ countries’ anti-gay laws and the struggle to repeal them. Member Members of the African Human Rights Media Network publish news articles and other media that educate readers about sexual minorities’ struggle for recognition of their human rights. Partner The St. Paul’s Foundation for International Reconciliation promotes LGBTQ+ rights through fact-based advocacy journalism and community projects. (California charity 80-0647355) © 2026 Erasing 76crimes. All rights reserved. Scroll To Top Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate Facebook Twitter Instagram Discover more from Erasing 76 Crimes Subscribe now to keep reading and get access to the full archive. Type your email… Subscribe Continue reading PRESS ESC TO CLOSE