Angola decriminalised same-sex sexual relationships About Us Advertise Work with us Login Register Latest News View all UK US World Health Politics Sport Business Culture View all TV Film Celebrity Drag Theatre Music Gaming Lifestyle View all Beauty Careers Fashion Relationships Travel Shopping View all Deals Recommended Fashion & Beauty Tickets Video View all News & Politics Entertainment Lifestyle Discover Trans Awareness Week Drag Race Explainers The Queer Agenda Toggle menu Account Register Login World Angola just ended its colonial-era gay sex ban Feb 11 2021 Written by Maggie Baska Share Save for later Comment The Angolan flag. (Eric Lafforgue/Art In All Of Us/Corbis via Getty) Angola has decriminalised homosexuality, lifting an archaic ban on same-sex relationships and introducing anti-discrimination protections. A new law overturned a ban on same-sex relationships which was inherited from when the country was a Portuguese colony. The ban described same-sex relationships as a “vice against nature”. Activist Jean-Luc Romero-Michel tweeted that the law was a “great step forward” in the fight against state-sponsored discrimination against the LGBT + community in the Southern African nation. He wrote: “The law decriminalising homosexuality adopted in Angola in 2019 took effect today. “Discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation is now reprehensible and even punishable by prison. “A great step forward for human rights which calls for others.” La loi dépénalisant l’homosexualité adoptée en #Angola en 2019 a pris effet aujourd’hui. 👉 La discrimination sur la base de l’orientation sexuelle est désormais répréhensible et même passible de prison. Une belle avancée pour les #DroitsHumains qui en appelle d'autres 🇦🇴🏳️‍🌈 pic.twitter.com/lplesllEl5 — Jean-Luc Romero-Michel (@JeanLucRomero) February 9, 2021 The new law also prohibits discrimination based on a person’s sexuality. The changes were passed in January 2019 after 155 of Angola’s lawmakers passed a bill to update their penal code, but were not signed into law by the country’s president until November 2020. Angola applauded for ending gay sex ban. The new Angolan law has been broadly and warmly welcomed by human rights activists and the LGBT+ community worldwide. In Kenya, LGBT+ rights groups hoped the move would inspire change within their own nation. We are excited & join #LGBTQ persons in #Angola to celebrate the decriminalization of homosexuality. This is surely a stride that continues to encourage & motivate us to advocate for the #Repeal162 here in Kenya! Aluta Continua! 👏🏿👏🏿✊🏿✊🏿 #LoveIsHuman pic.twitter.com/mHdhBvrmZU — #Repeal162 because #LoveIsHuman (@NGLHRC) February 11, 2021 Congratulations to the #LGBTI community in #Angola #StandUp4HumanRights #RegisterESGM pic.twitter.com/IEGXmhnqFp — Eswatini Sexual & Gender Minorities (@EMinorities) February 11, 2021 Other African nations still punish people for same-sex relationships. The changes in Angola came from the first rewriting of the country’s penal code since it gained independence in 1975. According to Human Rights Watch (HRW), the previous laws against same-sex relationships were rarely prosecuted but served as the basis for discrimination . There are at least 69 countries that still have national laws criminalising same-sex relationships, according to HRW. At least nine countries criminalise forms of gender expression that target trans and gender-nonconforming people. In Africa, these nations still outlaw same-sex relations: Morrocco, Algeria, Tunisia, Mauritania, Senegal, Gambia, Sierra Leone, Guinea, Liberia, Ghana, Togo, Nigeria, Cameroon, Namibia, Eswatini, Comoros, Zimbabwe, Zambia, Tanzania, Burundi, Kenya, Uganda, Somalia, Ethiopia, Sudan, Eritrea, Chad, Egypt, Libya, Mauritius. South Sudan and Malawi both criminalise same-sex relationships and forms of gender expression including trans, non-binary and gender non-conforming people. Laws outlawing homosexuality are colonial hangovers. When Botswana decriminalised gay sex in 2019, judge Michael Leburu declared “the anti-sodomy laws are a British import” developed “without the consultation of local peoples”. Queer News. Straight Up. The LGBTQ+ stories you don’t want to miss, delivered to your inbox daily. Email address required Must be valid email Register By registering you agree to our Privacy Policy Thanks for registering! You can update your email subscriptions at any time in the My profile section of your account. More: Africa Angola Dec 01 2023 16 TV stars you grew up watching who later came out as LGBTQ+ Related articles Africa Aug 24 Ghana Anglican Church officially speaks out against country’s new anti-LGBTQ+ laws Europe Aug 19 Russian LGBT Network shuts down after ‘extremism’ ruling makes its work ‘impossible’ Africa Aug 11 71 Senegal men arrested for having gay sex in ‘unnatural acts’ crackdown Africa Jul 15 Botswana’s bid to legalise equal marriage met with religious pushback Culture Jul 08 44 celebrities who played characters with the opposite sexuality Latest News Previous Next Celebrity Sep 25 Trans influencer calls out Nikki Glaser for stand-up joke about what’s ‘in her pants’ Culture Sep 25 Trans pro wrestling trailblazer Gisele Shaw signs exclusive NWA contract Bisexual Sep 25 The Traitors star Freddie Fraser’s mum’s emotional response to his coming out Celebrity Sep 25 Lili Reinhart says Hollywood ‘too afraid’ to greenlight lesbian vampire project Celebrity Sep 25 Carly Rae Jepsen describes moment Heated Rivalry inspired her son’s name Celebrity Sep 25 John Green ‘heartbroken’ for trans Harry Potter fans as he talks JK Rowling Current Affairs Sep 25 JD Vance claims James Talarico has a “weird obsession with children in drag” News Sep 25 Susan Sarandon, Hannah Einbinder and Caleb Hearon detained outside UN after protesting Netanyahu What to buy now Previous Next Fashion Mar 27 Connor Ives and MAC team up to re-release the iconic ‘Protect The Dolls’ t-shirt Music Mar 12 The Pussycat Dolls confirm reunion with new single and tour – how to get tickets Music Jan 23 A full guide to the 2026 Harry Styles Together, Together tour including dates and presale info Shopping Nov 24 2025 Ten truly awesome Christmas gifts you can buy to support queer-owned businesses Trans Sep 09 2025 Lush creates ‘luxurious’ trans flag bath bomb to support trans charities Tickets Jun 25 2025 Dolly Parton announces mini Las Vegas residency after wrapping her last tour almost a decade ago Shopping May 15 2025 LEGO celebrates late gay icon Keith Haring with new art set: ‘Want this so bad’ Music Apr 18 2025 Primavera Sound’s most iconic queer performances, from Troye Sivan to Ethel Cain Exclusive Previous Next Exclusive Sep 11 Ania Magliano talks SNL UK season two and anti-LGBTQ voices in comedy: ‘We do edgy in the right way’ Exclusive Sep 11 Elliot Tuttle on Blue Film’s personal inspiration, rejection and taboo: ‘It’s about loneliness’ Exclusive Sep 09 OF star Andy Lee on love for gay fans, ‘poisonous’ creators and ‘harmful’ stunts: ‘Gay men lift me up every day’ Exclusive Sep 07 Real Housewives of London spill the tea: ‘She’d go to the opening of a packet of crisps’ Opinion Sep 04 Katseye in London: A showcase of real talent deserving of the deafening screams Exclusive Sep 02 Adrian Chiarella and Joe Bird on tackling conversion therapy in gay horror Leviticus Exclusive Aug 21 Sziget Festival drag and circus troupe want audiences to feel like family Exclusive Aug 20 Gay wrestler Anthony Bowens says Heated Rivalry shows authentic life of closeted athletes Register to save articles and more. It'll only take a minute and it's free. JOIN US TODAY! Already have an account? Log in here "/> Download the PinkNews app Award winning LGBTQ+ journalism About us Editorial Policy Contact us Advertise Work for us Terms and conditions Privacy policy Privacy manager Privacy Manager