Job losses, rising attacks: 10 years of Nigeria's anti-LGBTQ law | Context by TRF Skip to Content Newsletters Context is no longer producing new reporting, but this site will remain as an archive. Further details on the Thomson Reuters Foundation's journalism can be found here. Climate Inclusive Economies Tech & Society LGBTQ+ stories on Context Inclusive Economies Socioeconomic Inclusion Job losses, rising attacks: 10 years of Nigeria's anti-LGBTQ law Pelumi Salako Published: August 14, 2024 Interview Share Interview Two men walk on the streets of Mushin in Lagos, Nigeria, February 14, 2020. REUTERS/Temilade Adelaja What’s the context? The 2014 law has fuelled violence, extortion and discrimination against the LGBTQ+ community, a leading activist says 2014 law criminalised same-sex relationships Law harms job prospects for LGBTQ+ Nigerians Attacks have increased since law passed LAGOS - The impact of a decade-old law that criminalises same-sex relationships in Nigeria has reached far beyond what the legislation covers, effectively sanctioning abuse against LGBTQ+ individuals and robbing them of their livelihoods, a leading rights defender said. Nigeria passed the Same-Sex Marriage Prohibition Act (SSMPA) in 2014, prohibiting marriages and civil unions between members of the same sex, an act that is punishable by up to 14 years in jail. "Most importantly, it has presented LGBTQI persons as criminals," said Olumide Makanjuola, in Nigeria, director of programs at the Initiative Sankofa d'Afrique de l'Ouest, which aims to strengthen LGBTQ+ rights in West Africa. "Once you are criminalised for who you are, you can't seek redress, you can't seek justice,” he told Context/Thomson Reuters Foundation. Before 2014, same-sex relations between men were punishable with imprisonment under federal law and under Sharia law, which is practised in most of Nigeria's Muslim-dominated northern states. But the law signed by former President Goodluck Jonathan in 2014 went further than the previous federal prohibition by banning same-sex cohabitation, the meetings of LGBTQ+ organisations and "the public show of same sex amorous relationship." Human rights groups have raised concerns that the breadth of the law, its ambiguous provisions and harsh penalties have led to an increase in violence against LGBTQ+ individuals and activists. "You can imagine the fear and the general atmosphere of uncertainty it created for many people within the community," said Makanjuola, who co-founded The Initiative for Equal Rights (TIERs) to advocate for the LGBTQ+ community in 2005. Olumide Makanjuola, a director at West African LGBTQ+ rights group Initiative Sankofa d'Afrique de l'Ouest, in an undated handout photograph. Thomson Reuters Foundation/Handout Olumide Makanjuola, a director at West African LGBTQ+ rights group Initiative Sankofa d'Afrique de l'Ouest, in an undated handout photograph. Thomson Reuters Foundation/Handout Financial impact As the SSMPA made discrimination against the community more acceptable, LGBTQ+ Nigerians started to hide their identities to avoid losing their jobs or risk arrest, said Makanjuola. Human Rights Watch saw this trend emerge in a 2016 report. Many LGBTQ+ Nigerians had "adopted self-censoring behaviour by significantly and consciously altering their gender presentation to avoid detection or suspicion by members of the public and to avoid arrest and extortion," it said. Economic insecurity is likely now more acute as Nigeria experiences a cost-of-living crisis. Inflation hit 34% in June, the fastest rate in 28 years, and prompted countrywide protests this month. Makanjuola said LGBTQ+ Nigerians are likely bearing the brunt of the country's economic crisis. "Once you are already excluded and disenfranchised by society and law, it makes things complex for you," he said. Amid the crisis, LGBTQ+ Nigerians have become increasingly susceptible to extortion and blackmail, Makanjuola said. Afraid of public abuse and police harassment, members of the LGBTQ+ community use online apps like Grindr, Romeo and Tinder to meet partners, but criminals have long exploited online dating apps to kidnap, beat and extort victims. Even before 2014, Nigeria's LGBTQ+ community was targeted for kito , slang for the entrapment of Nigerian men on social networking apps by threatening to out them if they don't hand over money. Those attacks are now on the rise. In 2023, about 70% of 996 human rights violations against people who are or were perceived to be LGBTQ+ were kito cases, according to data collected by TIERs and 22 other rights groups across Nigeria. Other attacks against LGBTQ+ Nigerians have also surged in the last 10 years, the data also showed. Incidents of assault and battery has more than quadrupled. Reporting these crimes often isn't an option, because LGBTQ+ victims fear that the police might prosecute them rather than their attacker, said Makanjuola. "The system, which the police are part of, is supposed to protect and enable their freedom but is the same system that stalls them," he said. A lack of trust in the justice system encourages victims to give into extortion rather than report it, he said. Go Deeper 'I had been set up': LGBTQ+ Nigerians battle dating app traps Go Deeper How new anti-LGBTQ+ bills in Africa expand crackdown on rights Opinion Go Deeper As a lawyer in Nigeria, one trans woman has renewed my hope More visibility, slow acceptance One thing that has changed for the better is that social media has created a space for LGBTQ+ Nigerians as physical spaces shrink, Makanjuola said. "In terms of broader social perception and legality, we are still way behind but we have progressed on visibility," he said. "What we are still dealing with is social acceptance." A poll commissioned by TIERs showed social acceptance of LGBTQ+ people rose to 34% in 2022 from 30% in 2019. According to an Afrobarometer survey conducted between 2019 and 2021, only 21% of Nigerians are tolerant of same-sex relationships , but that figure is up from 8% in surveys conducted between 2016 and 2018. While the vast number of Nigerians oppose same-sex relationships, support for the SSMPA has waned to 48% in 2022 from 77% in 2015, the TIERs survey showed. This gives Makanjuola hope for greater inclusion of LGBTQ+ Nigerians in the future. "The desire for me has always been to build a society where we can live and be free and be equal, where you are going to be judged not by your sexual orientation but by your character," he said. This story is part of a series supported by Hivos's Free To Be Me programme (Reporting by Pelumi Salako; Editing by Sadiya Ansari and Ayla Jean Yackley.) Context is powered by the Thomson Reuters Foundation Newsroom. Our Standards: Thomson Reuters Trust Principles Tags LGBTQ+ MORE ON Socioeconomic Inclusion Socioeconomic Inclusion Meet Spain's first ambassador for global LGBTQ+ rights Opinion Socioeconomic Inclusion It’s time for a currency that values the planet, not just profit Socioeconomic Inclusion 'I lost my job': US aid cuts hit women clearing Zimbabwe's mines MORE ON Inclusive Economies Money, Power & People One year of Trump: How the president undermined global LGBTQ+ rights Money, Power & People US abortion policy under Trump 2.0 one year on Socioeconomic Inclusion International aid cuts hobble drive to declare Zimbabwe mine-free Featured President Donald Trump 2.0: What's next for the U.S.? Our experienced correspondents around the United States and further afield examine how a Trump presidency affects climate change, reproductive rights, LGBTQ+ communities, immigration, socio-economic inclusion, and debates around Big Tech and AI. Here’s a round-up of our coverage so far. Go Deeper Digital Rights 'I had been set up': LGBTQ+ Nigerians battle dating app traps Socioeconomic Inclusion How new anti-LGBTQ+ bills in Africa expand crackdown on rights Opinion Money, Power & People As a lawyer in Nigeria, one trans woman has renewed my hope Digital Rights 'I had been set up': LGBTQ+ Nigerians battle dating app traps Socioeconomic Inclusion How new anti-LGBTQ+ bills in Africa expand crackdown on rights Opinion Money, Power & People As a lawyer in Nigeria, one trans woman has renewed my hope The Backstory Nigerian police may seek army help after violent protests Blackmailed with nudes, Nigerian lesbians find safety outside the closet Nigeria's paramilitary raids birthday party for gay people, 76 arrested Nigerian police may seek army help after violent protests Blackmailed with nudes, Nigerian lesbians find safety outside the closet Nigeria's paramilitary raids birthday party for gay people, 76 arrested These links open on reuters.com Related Socioeconomic Inclusion We made this podcast in 2023. Why did we wait to release it? Socioeconomic Inclusion No place for queer people 8:14 Socioeconomic Inclusion No meds, no doctor: How Trump's HIV cuts hit trans Namibians Socioeconomic Inclusion We made this podcast in 2023. Why did we wait to release it? Socioeconomic Inclusion No place for queer people 8:14 Socioeconomic Inclusion No meds, no doctor: How Trump's HIV cuts hit trans Namibians Get ‘Policy, honestly’ to learn how big decisions impact ordinary people. Email address: Subscribe By providing your email, you agree to our Privacy Policy . MORE ON Socioeconomic Inclusion Socioeconomic Inclusion Meet Spain's first ambassador for global LGBTQ+ rights Opinion Socioeconomic Inclusion It’s time for a currency that values the planet, not just profit Socioeconomic Inclusion 'I lost my job': US aid cuts hit women clearing Zimbabwe's mines MORE ON Inclusive Economies Money, Power & People One year of Trump: How the president undermined global LGBTQ+ rights Money, Power & People US abortion policy under Trump 2.0 one year on Socioeconomic Inclusion International aid cuts hobble drive to declare Zimbabwe mine-free Latest on Context 13:02 AI AI needs a lot of power and water. Can Mexico afford it? Long Read AI Resistance blooms in Mexico's data centre valley Socioeconomic Inclusion ‘I felt dirty': Gay Panamanians fight blood donation ban Climate Risks What one year of Trump’s climate censorship reveals Most Read 1 How flood control projects fail the poor in the Philippines 2 Britain's foreign aid: Where does the money go? 3 Resistance blooms in Mexico's data centre valley 4 What does a Donald Trump presidency mean for LGBTQ+ rights? 5 Europe's security depends on LGBTI+ rights - here's why 6 ‘I felt dirty': Gay Panamanians fight blood donation ban Most Read 1 How flood control projects fail the poor in the Philippines 2 Britain's foreign aid: Where does the money go? 3 Resistance blooms in Mexico's data centre valley 4 What does a Donald Trump presidency mean for LGBTQ+ rights? 5 Europe's security depends on LGBTI+ rights - here's why Context is a media platform created by the Thomson Reuters Foundation. We provide news and analysis that contextualises how critical issues and events affect ordinary people, society and the environment. Find out more. Sections Climate Inclusive Economies Tech & Society Explore Opinion Videos In Focus Long Reads About Us About Context About Thomson Reuters Foundation Come Work For Us Sponsors Donations Newsletters Our Products Workforce Disclosure Initiative The Workforce Disclosure Initiative is an investor-backed project to improve the quantity & quality of corporate workforce data, via an annual survey & engagement process. Find out more. Trust Conference Trust Conference is the Thomson Reuters Foundation’s flagship annual event, taking place in the heart of London each year. Find out more. TrustLaw TrustLaw is the Thomson Reuters Foundation’s global pro bono service, facilitating free legal assistance to NGOs and social enterprises around the world. Find out more. Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Thomson Reuters Trust Principles © 2026 Thomson Reuters Foundation Exclusive commentary & unique insights. Always free. Directly to your inbox. Subscribe Now