Albanian MP Reprimanded for Gay Slur | Balkan Insight Back to BalkanInsight About Premium Subscription Newsletters Contact Follow us Search Countries Albania Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Greece Kosovo Moldova Montenegro North Macedonia Romania Serbia Turkey In Focus Balkan Transitional Justice Reporting Democracy Focus on Ukraine Focus on Gender Justice Balkan Migrant Route Balkan Media Watch Digital Rights Bulgaria-North Macedonia dispute Paper Trail: Investigations Russia in the Balkans Turkey and the Balkans Open Data and E-Governance China in the Balkans Focus on Far Right Environment Serbia-Kosovo Relations News Premium All Opinions Analysis Investigations Profiles Features Interviews Subscribe Newsletters Sign in News Albanian MP Reprimanded for Gay Slur Besar Likmeta Tirana October 27, 2011 13:16 Albania’s Anti-Discrimination Commissioner has today reprimanded ruling Democratic Party MP, Tritian Shehu, for saying in parliament that “homosexuality is disease and should be treated with hormones,” last December. Ruling Democratic Party MP Tritan Shehu “Mr. Shehu should avoid discriminatory remarks in the future, which cause an atmosphere of tension and unfriendliness towards the LGBT [Lesbian Gay Bisexual Transgender] community in Albania,” the commissioner wrote in a letter to parliament. The commissioner also recommended that parliament grant “all guaranties so that the thoughts, opinions and remarks of the LGBT community are heard, evaluated and taken into consideration, when they are directly involved on specific topics, in order to help the community to enjoy fully its rights and freedoms.” The anti-discrimination commissioner is akin to an Ombudsman and was created in the winter of 2009, when Albania approved a bill to protect sexual minorities from discriminatory practices. It remains unclear why the commissioner waited up to 10 months to review the case over Shehu’s comments. While the Albanian parliament decriminalised homosexual relations in 1995, more than a decade later gays and lesbians are still heavily stigmatised, and a majority hide their sexual orientation, fearing that if it is discovered their safety will be endangered. Human rights reports on Albania concede that ingrained attitudes among the public leave Albanian gays and lesbians on the fringes of society. According to the Albanian Human Rights Group, a Tirana based NGO, Albanian homosexuals face “intolerance, physical and psychological violence – often from the police – and discrimination in the workplace.” Albania BIRN VIEW ALL POSTS Latest premium September 25, 2026 Review Week in Review: Spyware, AI and Arrests September 25, 2026 Video ARTE Europe Weekly: Datacentres and Hidden Cost of Digital Progress September 25, 2026 Review Democracy Digest: Czechia Restricts Rules for Russian Diplomats Travelling September 25, 2026 Feature Fading Away: Sicily’s Ancient Albanian Community Fears its Identity Risks Erasure September 25, 2026 Opinion Bringing the Balkans into Schengen: a Win-Win Scenario for Europe Subscribe to Premium Content Most popular September 24, 2026 Opinion Albania’s Cannabis Traffic is No Longer Only One-Way September 22, 2026 News Albania's Intelligence Chief Suspended for Allegedly Aiding Crime Group September 23, 2026 Investigation Netanyahu Lawyer Part of Operation to Build Israeli Drones in Serbia September 25, 2026 Review Week in Review: Spyware, AI and Arrests September 23, 2026 Opinion As Geopolitical Competition Intensifies, the EU’s Balkans Policy Must Adapt About About Us The Team Supporters and Partners Awards Subscription Premium Subscription Personal Subscription Institutional Subscription Student Subscription Terms & Policies General Terms of Use Personal Terms of Use Institutional Terms of Use Privacy Policy Cookie Policy Copyright Notice Republishing Policy Community Guidelines Editorial Standards Editorial Corrections & Complaints Letters to the Editor Engage Newsletters RSS Feeds Contact Services BIRN Consultancy Follow us Copyright BIRN 2026 | Powered by WordPress / WPML Published by BIRN Manage Consent To provide the best experiences, we and our partners use technologies like cookies to store and/or access device information. Consenting to these technologies will allow us and our partners to process personal data such as browsing behavior or unique IDs on this site and show (non-) personalized ads. Not consenting or withdrawing consent, may adversely affect certain features and functions. Click below to consent to the above or make granular choices. Your choices will be applied to this site only. You can change your settings at any time, including withdrawing your consent, by using the toggles on the Cookie Policy, or by clicking on the manage consent button at the bottom of the screen. Functional Functional Always active The technical storage or access is strictly necessary for the legitimate purpose of enabling the use of a specific service explicitly requested by the subscriber or user, or for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission of a communication over an electronic communications network. Preferences Preferences The technical storage or access is necessary for the legitimate purpose of storing preferences that are not requested by the subscriber or user. Statistics Statistics The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for statistical purposes. The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for anonymous statistical purposes. Without a subpoena, voluntary compliance on the part of your Internet Service Provider, or additional records from a third party, information stored or retrieved for this purpose alone cannot usually be used to identify you. Marketing Marketing The technical storage or access is required to create user profiles to send advertising, or to track the user on a website or across several websites for similar marketing purposes. Statistics Marketing Features Always active Always active Manage options Manage services Manage {vendor_count} vendors Read more about these purposes Accept Deny View preferences Save preferences View preferences {title} {title} {title} Manage consent