Gabon: New constitution won't criminalize homosexuality Now Reading In new constitution, Gabon rejects appeals to criminalize homosexuality Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate In new constitution, Gabon rejects appeals to criminalize homosexuality by Moïse Manoël-Florisse November 25, 2024 Moïse Manoël-Florisse Moïse Manoël-Florisse, is an African-Caribbean online journalist keeping an eye… Read Next Awaiting homosexuality trial in Cameroon, female detainee wins release on bail. At a time of great political changes, Gabon endorses the right of privacy Brice Oligui Nguema meets with leaders of parties opposed to the proposed constitutional referendum (Courtesy Présidence de la République Gabonaise/Twitter @PresidenceGA ) On November 16, Gabonese voters ratified a referendum on a new constitution, the fruit of bitter discussions between the transitional military authorities who deposed Ali Bongo’s regime in August 2023 and Gabonese civil society players, some of whom were calling for the criminalization of homosexuality to be included in the draft constitution. In the end, the draft constitution instead included important provisions protecting LGBT+ rights but with the caveat that it also codified a definition of marriage that excludes same-sex couples. The referendum was ratified with over 90% of the vote , despite a low turnout of almost 55%. This is a moment of great change for the oil-rich, central African nation. The coup brought to an end 56 years of rule by the Bongo family, and the new constitution is meant to return the country to a democratic, republican order, with fresh elections to be held in April of next year. For Erasing 76 Crimes, Franco-Gabonese musician Jann Halexander agreed to share his impressions of the important legal victories and compromises made for LGBT+ people in the new constitution. Jann Halexander is a Franco-Gabonese variety singer born in Libreville (Gabon), where he learned to play the piano at an early age. Since 2003, he has given over 300 concerts across Europe (credit: @PierreOrcel). Turning the page on the Bongo years Jann Halexander: Since its independence in 1960, Gabon has only had three presidents, two of whom came from the same family clan, Omar Bongo (1967 – 2009) and Ali Bongo (2009 – 2023). With this constitution, we turn the page after 60 years of patrimonial and discretionary management of the country and its wealth, while Gabon experienced a brief episode of criminalization of homosexuality between 2020 and 2021. Protecting privacy Today, I praise the liberal intentions of this text, which already stipulates in article 18 that “everyone has the right to respect for his or her private life,” while article 19 guarantees that “the secrecy of correspondence, postal, telegraphic, electronic, telephone and telematic communications is inviolable.” It has to be said that in Gabon, kongossa, or the art of keeping an eye on what one’s neighbor is doing, is culturally very widespread. Still, the intrusive practices of the former regime fueled by denunciation and rumors could lead to the ruin of the lives of LGBT+ people. See Also Uganda’s pro-LGBTQI+ rights legislator loses parliamentary seat Now there’s a framework that protects the privacy of individuals, and that in itself is a great step forward, which for me doesn’t in any way contradict Article 169, which stipulates that marriage in Gabon is “the union between two persons of the opposite sex.” Location of Gabon in west central Africa. An African social model in the making Indeed, in Gabon and more broadly in Africa, if there are LGBT+ mobilizations, they don’t aim to demand the right to marriage and adoption between people of the same gender as in northern countries, but they do aspire to the right to indifference and to the respect due to human dignity, similar to other societies. Lastly, I’m proud of Gabon, where the authorities have chosen not to interfere in the most intimate of individual matters, without altering the cultural value of local matrimonial unions, because often the paradigm used to defend traditions is to repress homosexuality, as is the case in Senegal , Mali , and Burkina-Faso . Gabon, which criminalized homosexuality in 2020 [and decriminalized it the following year], shows that another path is possible, without electoral posturing or Manichaeistic, good-versus-evil framing. Moïse Manoël-Florisse November 25, 2024 The Latest Posts Turkey’s anti-LGBT crackdown expands; activists fight back Proposed Ukraine law would expand ban on anti-LGBTQ discrimination A third of LGBTQ groups say 2025’s drastic cuts will force them to close Bangladesh activists launch petition to end anti-LGBTQ discrimination Uganda’s ‘Not Free’ rating partly due to anti-LGBT laws Appeal to Indonesia to stop listing ‘LGBTQ culture’ as a national threat LGBTI+ rights activists in Turkey seek international support during crackdown Analysis: Cameroon’s anti-gay raids violated Cameroon’s own rules Ghana’s £10m deal is dead; gay fans won’t be lured to homophobic nation Turkey: 162 targeted in anti-LGBTQ+ raids If you support LGBTQ rights, please support our LGBTQ rights journalism Previous Article Awaiting homosexuality trial in Cameroon, female detainee wins release on bail. Next Article View Comment (1) Leave a Reply Cancel reply Your email address will not be published. Name * E-mail * Website Notify me of new posts by email. Δ Related Posts Longtime Jamaican activist celebrates long-term marriage Senegal Court blocks constitutional ban on same-sex marriage Senegal amends its Constitution to ban same-sex marriage Prediction: Gabon will make homosexuality a crime once again African and global figures by the dozens urge Senegal to talk, not enforce anti-gay law Wave of arrests of gay men in Senegal fuels hysteria about HIV About The Erasing 76 Crimes news site covers the human toll of 66+ countries’ anti-gay laws and the struggle to repeal them. Member Members of the African Human Rights Media Network publish news articles and other media that educate readers about sexual minorities’ struggle for recognition of their human rights. Partner The St. Paul’s Foundation for International Reconciliation promotes LGBTQ+ rights through fact-based advocacy journalism and community projects. (California charity 80-0647355) © 2026 Erasing 76crimes. All rights reserved. Scroll To Top Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate Facebook Twitter Instagram Discover more from Erasing 76 Crimes Subscribe now to keep reading and get access to the full archive. Type your email… Subscribe Continue reading PRESS ESC TO CLOSE