Don't ignore us, Caribbean activists tell UK gay press Now Reading Don't ignore us, Caribbean activists tell UK gay press Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate Don't ignore us, Caribbean activists tell UK gay press by Colin Stewart April 4, 2017 Colin Stewart Colin Stewart is a 45-year journalism veteran living in Southern… Read Next Russia leaves LGBT Chechen victims in danger Stonewall’s annual Equality DInner fundraiser in 2014. “Nothing about us without us” is a motto with a long history . Now it’s a theme of a protest by Caribbean LGBTI rights activists against the London-based LGBTI publication Pink News . Pink News article on March 28, 2017, focused on the Stonewall Equality Dinner. The Caribbean LGBTI rights groups United and Strong of St. Lucia and the Eastern Caribbean Alliance for Diversity and Equality (ECADE) has issued a public complaint about a Pink News article that questioned whether a fundraiser for the British LGBTI organization Stonewall should have offered a vacation to St. Lucia, which is one of this blog’s 77+ nations with anti-gay laws. The March 28 article in Pink News was headlined, “Stonewall auctions luxury holiday to country where gays are imprisoned.” It stated: Stonewall has auctioned off a holiday to a country where gay sex is illegal. People who engage in gay sex can also be imprisoned for up to 10 years in the Caribbean island of St Lucia. Stonewall sold a holiday to the island at its annual Equality Dinner on [March 24] under the heading “Paradise Found”. PinkNews asked Stonewall why the holiday was auctioned off, what was happening to the money, and whether the charity would cover the legal or medical costs of the auction winner if they get arrested or face homophobic or transphobic abuse…The sale raised £8,000 according to OutOfOffice, the travel site which supplied the holiday for Stonewall to auction off. The company also organises trips to Barbados and Tanzania, which both carry a maximum sentence of life imprisonment for men caught having gay sex. … This was the Caribbean organizations’ press release in response to the Pink News article: Rights’ groups urge international media to utilise local sources Logo of United and Strong of St. Lucia (Castries, March 30, 2017 ) Saint Lucian and eastern Caribbean rights’ group are urging the media to validate sources of information and utilise local advocacy groups when writing about the region. This comes following an article in a UK publication under the attention-grabbing headline “Stonewall auctions luxury holiday to country where gays are imprisoned ” . The piece explored the logic of an organisation representing lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender people auctioning a vacation to a country where intimate relationships between same-sex consenting adults is criminalised. The article also notes that “many Caribbean countries such as St Lucia proactively say they welcome everyone, including LGBT tourists, despite not yet having the courage to formalise this with a change in laws.” Of concern to local activists is the hype around the risk of visiting Saint Lucia. The piece uses a claim that violence against gay people in the Caribbean was increasing, and that “St Lucia now has a murder or so every year.” Activists applaud the effort to bring this story to the attention of the world. It has expanded discussion about the situation of LGBTQI+ people in our small islands and sought to call states and civil society to account. We note however, that information could have been better sourced. Image from ECADE logo “Yes, discriminatory laws exist however we’ve had gay cruises and gay couples and people visiting here safely,” notes Adaryl Williams, of United and Strong. “There are several hotel properties with policies in support of LGBT persons. Pink News should have done a bit more research.” Maria Fontenelle, ECADE’s Communications and Programmes Officer adds, “This misrepresentation of the situation of LGBTQ people in Saint Lucia can be deleterious to our advocacy, undermining the work and our credibility. By distorting the issue, it further trivialises the severity of the situation in countries where gay people face greater risk of being brutalised and killed.” See Also U.S. rejects United Nations resolution against AIDS ECADE, which is the umbrella body for the Eastern Caribbean sub-region, has reached out to Pink News, seeking to clarify why even existing statements by activists from Saint Lucia and the Eastern Caribbean, were not utilised. “While,we do have buggery laws on the statute books, they have not recently been enforced,” says Jassica St Rose, Women’s Secretariat Representative of the International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender and Intersex Association (ILGA). “Moreover, currently no one is imprisoned in Saint Lucia for being gay. It would have been instructive if “Pink News” contacted United and Strong or ECADE for comment. “This also raises the question, why would a pro-LGBT organisation like Stonewall, auction a vacation that would place people at risk? While in 2011, a group of vacationing gay men was attacked in Soufriere, the then Tourism Minister, Allen Chastanet apologised for the incident and indicated that Saint Lucia is a safe place for all travellers.” Kenita Placide, executive director of ECADE. (Photo courtesy of YouTube) Executive Director of ECADE Kenita Placide has been in touch with Stonewall about collaboration and campaigns as recent as January of 2017. Further, ECADE has previously established contact with Pink News, which is among its media contacts. Eastern Caribbean activists note that the Pink News article leaves the conversation open for civil society and governments to engage in continuous dialogue and debate on LGBT Tourism and the laws that, while seldom enforced, still discriminate. Related articles: LGBTQI coalition gears up in eastern Caribbean (February 2017, 76crimes.com) ECADE promotes human rights (December 2016, St. Lucia Times) LGBTI rights: Important legal precedent in the Caribbean (June 2016, 76crimes.com) Caribbean nations inch their way toward LGBTI rights (April 2016, 76crimes.com) Working toward a Caribbean that’s no longer anti-ga (July 2014, 76crimes.com) Colin Stewart April 4, 2017 The Latest Posts Turkey’s anti-LGBT crackdown expands; activists fight back Proposed Ukraine law would expand ban on anti-LGBTQ discrimination A third of LGBTQ groups say 2025’s drastic cuts will force them to close Bangladesh activists launch petition to end anti-LGBTQ discrimination Uganda’s ‘Not Free’ rating partly due to anti-LGBT laws Appeal to Indonesia to stop listing ‘LGBTQ culture’ as a national threat LGBTI+ rights activists in Turkey seek international support during crackdown Analysis: Cameroon’s anti-gay raids violated Cameroon’s own rules Ghana’s £10m deal is dead; gay fans won’t be lured to homophobic nation Turkey: 162 targeted in anti-LGBTQ+ raids Russian LGBT Network seeks to rescue imperiled gay Chechens Previous Article Russia leaves LGBT Chechen victims in danger Next Article View Comments (0) Leave a Reply Cancel reply Your email address will not be published. Name * E-mail * Website Notify me of new posts by email. Δ Related Posts Vincent McDoom lifts the lid on homophobia in France’s Caribbean entertainment industry Russia makes it a crime to work with ILGA World on behalf of LGBTQ rights Azerbaijan police detain over 100 in queer nightclub raid LGBTQ rights update: 2025 tally and 2026 preview 2025 LGBTQ rights update: Progress and backsliding in Latin America and Caribbean St. Lucia election mirrors an increasing acceptance of island’s LGBTQ community About The Erasing 76 Crimes news site covers the human toll of 66+ countries’ anti-gay laws and the struggle to repeal them. Member Members of the African Human Rights Media Network publish news articles and other media that educate readers about sexual minorities’ struggle for recognition of their human rights. Partner The St. Paul’s Foundation for International Reconciliation promotes LGBTQ+ rights through fact-based advocacy journalism and community projects. (California charity 80-0647355) © 2026 Erasing 76crimes. All rights reserved. Scroll To Top Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate Facebook Twitter Instagram Discover more from Erasing 76 Crimes Subscribe now to keep reading and get access to the full archive. Type your email… Subscribe Continue reading PRESS ESC TO CLOSE