Budapest Pride: “Anti-queer laws can be repealed with two-third majority” | Niha+ Skip to content Türkçe Kurdî English Menu Agenda Gender Human Rights Ecology Feature / Analysis Arts Budapest Pride: “Anti-queer laws can be repealed with two-third majority” 17 April 2026 With the end of Viktor Orbán’s conservative rule, a new era began in Hungary, but the silence of Péter Magyar and the Tisza Party, who won a majority in the elections, on LGBTQ+ rights raised questions. Johanna Majercsik, spokesperson for Budapest Pride, stated: “The most urgent issue is the restoration of the right to assembly.” Source: Budapest Pride In the Hungarian general elections on April 12, Victor Orbán’s far-right Fidesz (Hungarian Civic Alliance) party, which had been in power for 16 years, lost its grip on power. Péter Magyar and his Tisza (Respect and Freedom Party) party, which was initially close to Orbán but later split from Fidesz and adopted a center-right stance, achieved a victory. According to the results from the election, with almost all the ballots counted, Tisza won 138 seats in the 199-member parliament. Having surpassed 133 seats indicates that Tisza has achieved a majority sufficient to amend the constitution. Viktor Orbán, who served as Prime Minister of Hungary for 16 years until his electoral defeat in April 2026, became widely recognized for implementing a series of laws and policies targeting the LGBTQ+ community. Orbán made an amendment on 2012 saying constitution recognizes only two sexes. In 2020, this was tightened to effectively ban adoption by same-sex couples. The Child Protection Act (Act LXXIX), which passed on June 2021 under the guise of protecting children, implicitly conflates LGBTQ+ individuals with child abusers. This legislation prohibits the “depiction or promotion” of homosexuality or gender reassignment to minors under 18 in education, media, and advertising. The law restricts TV programs showing LGBTQ+ content and books containing LGBTQ+ themes. Furthermore, in March 2025, Orbán government passed legislation that effectively banned LGBTQ+ Pride marches, allowing for the use of facial recognition technology to identify attendees Budapest Pride: “The most urgent issue is the restoration of the right to assembly” Spokesperson of Budapeşt Pride, Johanna Majercsik, evaluated the demands of Budapest Pride after the Hungary elections. Majercsik describe the collapse of Viktor Orbán’s 16-year rule as a path opened for Hungary to return to the rule of law. “A fair and just democracy cannot exist without human rights, including LGBTQ rights,” she said. Majercsik mentioned that with a two-thirds majority, all anti-LGBTQ laws passed by the Orbán government can be repealed. “The most urgent issue” said Majercsik, “is the restoration of the right of assembly. This is particularly urgent because we are holding the Budapest Pride March on June 27. But beyond that, the previous government passed numerous anti-queer laws that were enshrined in the Fundamental Law. With a two-third majority, however, these can also be repealed.” “We know nothing about Magyar’s stance on legal gender and name changes” Majercsik stated that the program of the TISZA Party that Péter Magyar was elected from makes no mention of the LGBTQ community: “In his public speeches, he is rather vague when he says that everyone is free to love whomever they want, as long as they don’t break the law (as he stated at the international press conference on April 13). Alas, it is rather impossible to conclude from this whether he intends to use legislation to allow same-sex couples to marry and adopt, and we know nothing about his stance on legal gender and name changes.” She stated that the LGBTQ+ community in Hungary feels fear, relief, distrust, hope at once at the moment. She lists the reasons why the community experience all these feelings at once as follows: “The TISZA Party’s program makes no mention of the LGBTQ community, Péter Magyar is vague on this issue, and when Viktor Orbán intended to ban Pride marches last year, Magyar, our future prime minister, remained silent, he didn’t speak up for the LGBTQ people.” People have zero toleration Majercsik explaining more than 300,000 people took part in last year’s Pride march in Budapest, further said this can be considered an all-time record since they had estimated 35,000 participants in previous marches.She emphasized that this amount of people showed that people have no toleration to any disregard for fundamental rights. “In 2025, the people sent a clear message to those in power that they would not tolerate the erosion of their fundamental rights, and they declared that the right to assembly belongs to everyone. Last year’s Pride march played a crucial role in the ousting of the Orbán regime: it was one of the key events where people gathered in huge numbers to express that they had had enough and wanted change.” Source: Green European Journal, Wikipedia Categories LGBTI+ Tags budapest pride , leadstory , lgbtq+ , Peter Magyar , victor orban The state of human rights: Resistance against systemic injustice globally IHR: Events in Urfa and Maraş are a consequence of violence policies Related Articles Ecmel Deniz: “Our dignity cannot be packaged, our bodies belong to us!” Queer poets say “queer poetry exists to disrupt mainstream showcases” 12 trans women detained in Istanbul’s Bayram Street Independent journalism, in-depth reporting, and human rights-centered analyses. Masthead Privacy Agreement KVKK Clarification Text Contact [email protected] © 2026 Niha+. All rights reserved. © 2026 Niha+ • Built with GeneratePress We use cookies to sustain our independent journalism and provide you with a better reading experience. For detailed information, you may review our Privacy Agreement . Accept all Accept only mandatory Manage preferences Search for: Close GDPR Cookie Settings Privacy overview Strictly necessary cookies 3rd party cookies Powered by GDPR Cookie Compliance Privacy overview Niha+ respects your digital footprint within the framework of independent journalism principles and reader privacy. While browsing our site, cookies are used to provide you with an uninterrupted reading experience and to secure the technical infrastructure of our platform. You can manage your cookie preferences as you wish by using the menu on the left. For detailed information on how your personal data is processed, please review our Privacy Agreemen t and KVKK Clarification Text . Strictly necessary cookies These cookies are technically mandatory for our website to perform its core functions, ensure cyber security, and remember your language preferences (Turkish, Kurmanji, English). They do not collect or store any of your personal data within our systems. As the use of these cookies is not subject to explicit consent under legal regulations, they are always active and cannot be disabled. Enable or Disable Cookies Enabled Disabled 3rd party cookies These cookies help us collect anonymous statistical data (via Google Analytics), such as the number of unique visitors and which features attract the most interest, in order to improve our independent journalism. Even if this data is anonymized by masking your IP address, these cookies are only activated with your active and explicit consent (by selecting "I Accept") to prevent the possibility of your device being indirectly identified. Enable or Disable Cookies Enabled Disabled Enable all Save settings