Brazil | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Brazil At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Legal Gender Recognition Possible? Yes LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? Yes Last Update: March 12, 2026 In Brazil, the human rights of LGBTIQ people have seen significant advances, but the situation remains complex and, in some cases, troubling. Marriage equality has been legal since 2013, when the right was recognized by the Supreme Court . However, there are efforts in Congress to repeal it , driven by lawmakers linked to anti-gender and anti-democratic groups. Despite constitutional guarantees and federal criminal provisions that, following a 2019 Supreme Court ruling , prohibit discrimination and hate crimes based on sexual orientation and gender identity, LGBTIQ people face significant challenges in ensuring their safety and rights on a daily basis. Brazil continues to have one of the highest rates of violence against sexual and gender minorities, particularly against transgender individuals. LGBTIQ persons actively participate in politics , with over 3,000 openly LGBTQ candidates running for office in the 2024 municipal elections. Trans people can legally change their gender markers based on self-determination . In addition, trans voters have been allowed to register with their gender identity and lived name , even when their official identification documents have not been updated. Although there are no specific laws protecting intersex people, on the International Day of Intersex Solidarity and Remembrance in November 2023, the Ministry of Human Rights and Citizenship issued an ordinance to formally establish the Working Group for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights of Intersex Persons. The group was installed in December 2023 and tasked with developing strategies and a final report on the rights of intersex people. Its mandate was later extended, and in October 2025, the Ministry announced the presentation of the Working Group’s Carta de Recomendações, a set of recommendations aimed at promoting and protecting the human rights of intersex persons and people with variations of sex characteristics. In September 2025, the government reinstated the National LGBTI+ Health Technical Committee , restoring a key participatory body dissolved in 2019 and reestablishing an important mechanism for shaping and monitoring inclusive public health policy. The same year, the Superior Court of Justice ruled in favor of allowing nonbinary people to amend their civil registry to reflect their gender identity, and the government convened a national conference to launch a proposed “National Policy for LGBTQIA+ Rights,” aimed at creating long-term, structural protections against discrimination. However, these advances exist in stark tension with the broader political landscape. While the executive branch has taken a pro-rights stance, a deeply conservative Congress has generated a surge of anti-LGBTIQ proposals across multiple legislative bodies, highlighting a growing institutional divide and the fragility of recent gains in Brazil. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International