Transfemicide becomes a crime in a ‘watershed’ moment for Mexico City | Transgender | The Guardian Skip to main content Skip to navigation Close dialogue 1 / 2 Next image Previous image Toggle caption Print subscriptions Search jobs Sign in Eur Europe edition UK edition US edition Australia edition International edition The Guardian - Back to home The Guardian News Opinion Sport Culture Lifestyle Show more Hide expanded menu News View all News World news UK news Climate crisis Ukraine Environment Science Global development Football Tech Business Obituaries Opinion View all Opinion The Guardian view Columnists Cartoons Opinion videos Letters Sport View all Sport Football Cricket Rugby union Tennis Cycling F1 Golf US sports Culture View all Culture Books Music TV & radio Art & design Film Games Classical Stage Lifestyle View all Lifestyle Fashion Food Recipes Love & sex Health & fitness Home & garden Women Men Family Travel Money Search input google-search Search Support us Print subscriptions Search jobs Holidays Digital Archive Guardian Licensing Live events About Us The Guardian app Video Podcasts Pictures Newsletters Today's paper Inside the Guardian Guardian Weekly Crosswords Wordiply Corrections Tips Search input google-search Search Search jobs Holidays Digital Archive Guardian Licensing Live events About Us World Europe US news Americas Asia Australia Middle East Africa Inequality Global development An activist celebrates the approval of the 'Paola Buenrostro law' in Mexico City, Mexico, on 18 July 2024. Photograph: Mario Guzman/EPA View image in fullscreen An activist celebrates the approval of the 'Paola Buenrostro law' in Mexico City, Mexico, on 18 July 2024. Photograph: Mario Guzman/EPA Rights and freedom Transgender This article is more than 2 years old Transfemicide becomes a crime in a ‘watershed’ moment for Mexico City This article is more than 2 years old Galvanized by the 2016 murder of trans sex worker Paola Buenrostro, activists applaud law as critical for feeling safe Supported by About this content Thomas Graham in Mexico City Wed 24 Jul 2024 13.30 CEST Last modified on Wed 2 Apr 2025 18.42 CEST Share Prefer the Guardian on Google W hen the trans sex worker Paola Buenrostro was killed by a client in Mexico City, her friend Kenya Cuevas grabbed the man to stop him fleeing and recorded the scene as police arrived amid sirens, screams and red and blue lights. Despite the footage and witness testimonies, a judge considered there was insufficient evidence to hold the man and released him after 48 hours, since which time he has been on the run. That night in 2016 turned Cuevas into an activist. And last week, after years of campaigning, Mexico City passed a law making transfemicide a crime with a prison sentence of up to 70 years – a “watershed” moment in one of Latin America’s deadliest countries for trans people. “For the first time, we can feel represented before the law, and that violence against us really carries a severe punishment,” said Cuevas at a gathering on Sunday to recognise the victory. “For the first time, I can feel some satisfaction, some peace, after all these long years of work.” The law, named in honour of Buenrostro, was passed almost unanimously in the state congress. Mexico City is the second of the country’s 32 states to criminalise transfemicide. Earlier this year, Nayarit, a small state on the Pacific coast, introduced sentences of up to 60 years for the crime. The law also makes it possible for a victim’s friends, not just relatives, to be involved in the bureaucracy of death and justice: identifying and claiming bodies, and driving the investigations. This matters in a country where some families disown transgender relatives, meaning there is no one to force the state into action. In 2022, more than 95% of homicides in Mexico went unpunished. For transfemicides, the figure is thought to be even higher. View image in fullscreen Trans activists celebrate in front of the Congress of Mexico in Mexico City, 18 July 2024. Photograph: Mario Guzman/EPA In the case of Buenrostro, the initial investigation was negligent, and the suspect was released. Officials later offered more than £20,000 for information as to his whereabouts, to no effect. Three years later, Ernestina Godoy, the attorney general of Mexico City, apologised for the actions of the authorities, making Buenrostro’s murder the first to be recognised and investigated as transfemicide. Aranza Villegas, whose sister Viridiana, a trans woman, was murdered two years ago not far from Mexico City, was also at Sunday’s gathering. In that case, the murderer was sent to prison, but Villegas said it was a rare exception. “I think it’s one in a hundred cases. It took a lot for me and my family to make it happen,” said Villegas. “If a trans woman doesn’t have a family like ours, nothing happens. And so when they die in such a cruel and tragic way, they’re forgotten, and they end up in a mass grave.” Another way the law seeks to address impunity is by mandating that the attorney general’s office produce statistics and quarterly reports on crimes against people in the LGBTQ+ community, allowing for a more rigorous approach to identifying the patterns of such crimes. About 5 million of Mexico’s 129 million inhabitants identify as LGBTQ+. According to Letra Ese, a human rights group, 231 members of the LGBTQ+ community were murdered between 2021 and 2023, of whom two-thirds were transgender – though many murders are never reported. This makes Mexico Latin America’s second-deadliest country for transgender people, after Brazil. “Every time you step outside, you are in danger, you fear you won’t come back,” said Villegas. “I live with this fear: I’ve received death threats from people [associated with my sister’s murderer].” But with the new law, Villegas says, she and other trans people will feel safer in Mexico City. “It is a watershed moment in stopping these terrible murders, and we hope it extends to every state in Mexico,” said Villegas. “We just want to be respected as transgender people, like any other human being,” added Villegas. “Respected – that’s all.” Explore more on these topics Transgender Rights and freedom Mexico Americas LGBTQ+ rights features Share Reuse this content More on this story More on this story Transgender woman wins record payout in China after electroshock treatment 21 Nov 2024 India’s 1st Best Trans Model Agency review – rocky and emotional journey for acceptance 13 Nov 2024 Georgian trans model murdered after parliament passes ‘anti-LGBTQ+’ law 19 Sept 2024 Transgender sprinter Valentina Petrillo fails to reach 400m final on Paralympic debut 2 Sept 2024 The good hacker: can Taiwanese activist turned politician Audrey Tang detoxify the internet? 17 Aug 2024 Valentina Petrillo to become first openly transgender athlete at Paralympics 13 Aug 2024 ‘We are killed for what we are’: trans women in Colombia targeted by armed groups 30 Jul 2024 ‘The teachers would refer to boys, girls – and you’: trans philosopher Paul B Preciado on reinventing Orlando 3 Jul 2024 Most viewed Most viewed World Europe US news Americas Asia Australia Middle East Africa Inequality Global development News Opinion Sport Culture Lifestyle Original reporting and incisive analysis, direct from the Guardian every morning Sign up for our email About us Help Complaints & corrections Contact us Tip us off SecureDrop Privacy policy Cookie policy Tax strategy Terms & conditions All topics All writers Newsletters Digital newspaper archive Bluesky Facebook Instagram LinkedIn Threads TikTok YouTube Advertise with us Search UK jobs Tips Accessibility settings Work with us Back to top © 2026 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. (dcr)