Amsterdam to tackle discrimination, violent incidents with priority during World Pride | NL Times Skip to main content Toggle navigation Main navigation Top stories Health Crime Politics Business Tech Culture Sports Weird 1-1-2 Image Mayor Femke Halsema on Amsterdam's boat in the Canal Parade during Pride Amsterdam 2024 - Credit: Gemeente Amsterdam / Gemeente Amsterdam - License: All Rights Reserved Politics Culture Entertainment Amsterdam Pride Amsterdam World Pride discrimination violence Femke Halsema lgbtqia+ » More tags « Less tags Tuesday, 16 June 2026 - 07:34 Share this article: Opens in a new window Opens in a new window Opens in a new window Opens in a new window Opens in a new window Opens in a new window Amsterdam to tackle discrimination, violent incidents with priority during World Pride If visitors to World Pride in Amsterdam fall victim to violence or discrimination, the city authorities will investigate those criminal offenses with priority, Mayor Femke Halsema wrote in a letter to the city council. There are agreements between the police, enforcers, and the organizers to “act quickly if incidents occur.” Halsema reports that the city is taking various measures to keep the LGBTQIA+ community safe during Pride in July and August. World Pride is being held in the Dutch capital this year to mark the 25th anniversary of the Netherlands opening marriage to same-sex couples. Halsema said that all visitors must feel free and safe during World Pride. Reports of LGBTQIA+ discrimination during Pride will be forwarded to the police quickly. There will also be a campaign to encourage people to report incidents. There will be Safer Spaces where people can find support or catch their breath, for example, and hired security guards will receive “extra instruction on how to interact with visitors during World Pride.” The Amsterdam police received between 25 and 45 reports of anti-LGBTQIA+ incidents during Pride in recent years, Halsema said. These involved vandalism, public nuisance, theft, discrimination, insults, intimidation, and serious assault. Typically, the perpetrators fled the scene as quickly as possible. “Preventing these incidents as much as possible involves being extra vigilant with parties on the street for signs of insecurity against World Pride visitors,” Halsema Said. World Pride will take place in Amsterdam from July 25 to August 8. Reporting by ANP More like this Image Thousands gather in Amsterdam in solidarity with Pride Berlin after attack Image Violence at Amersfoort Pride shows need for LGBTQIA+ safe spaces, advocates say Image WorldPride starts with unveiling of permanent Walk of Pride monument through Amsterdam Image Amsterdam LGBTQIA+ community's own discrimination hotline flooded with reports Follow us: Latest stories AZ striker Mexx Meerdink scores twice as Oranje beat Serbia 2-1 for Xavi's first win Maastricht University suspends Gazan student after post claiming Oct. 7 Israel attack 15,000 parents take first-aid courses for young children, up from 9,000 in 2022 Merwede Bridge on the A27 reopens after early finish of weight-cutting work Rarely lent Matisse art to be shown at H’ART Museum in Amsterdam from Oct. 3 to Feb. 14 Top stories Insiders allege PM Jetten wants to scrap benefit cuts, speed Box 3 tax shift Five arrested after 2 stabbed in Eindhoven Flash fire at neighbourhood barbecue injured 8 in De Wilp Victim of NDSM shooting in Amsterdam-Noord may have known his killer from prison The weekend is expected to be mostly dry; Temperatures could reach 29°C Tuesday © 2012-2026, NL Times, All rights reserved. Footer menu Change Privacy Settings Privacy Policy Contact Partner Content