Human Rights Situation for LGBTI Persons
and Sexual Rights in the Republic of Suriname

Updated additional information on the list of
suggested issues submitted to the Working Group
on the Suriname report (113st. Session)

Human Rights Committee
115st. Session

This report is submitted by
- LGBT Platform Suriname
- Heartland Alliance for Human Needs & Human Rights
- Akahatá - Equipo de Trabajo en Sexualidades y Géneros

October 2015

LGBT Platform Suriname1, Akahatá – Equipo de Trabajo en Sexualidades y Géneros, Heartland
Alliance for Human Needs & Human Rights' Global Initiative for Sexuality and Human Rights
(GISHR) are pleased by the possibility of submitting the following updated information to assist
the Human Rights Committee to review the implementation of the International Covenant on
Civil and Political Rights by Suriname

Additional information on the list of suggested issues2
Discrimination, unequal treatment and hatred speech on the basis of sexual orientation
and gender identity:
Right to equal enjoyment of civil and political rights without any kind of discrimination;
Equality before the law, equal protection of the law without any discrimination (Articles
2.1; 2.3, 3 and 26)
1. As it was referred in our former report3, even though the Constitution of the Republic of

Suriname establishes that any person may not be discriminated against due to any
status4, LGBTII persons daily still face social discrimination, violence and stigmatization
in all the spheres of their lives.
2. In March 2015 specific legislation has been revised regarding the discrimination and

hate speech on the basis of sexual orientation. Specifically Article 175,175a and 176 of
the Surinamese Penal Code have been updated to include the protection of LGBT people
in Suriname5. Under the revised Penal Code, discrimination on the basis of sexual
orientation is sanctioned by 1 year of jail time or a fine of the 3rd category.

3. Although revisions have been set in place by the Government, these new rules are yet to

be implemented in the policy of protecting LGBTII people in Suriname. The delay in the
application of specific legislation and the lack of public policies to guarantee the
enjoyment of human rights for LGBTII people, added to the position adopted by some
members of the Government against homosexuality6, perpetuate homophobia in
Suriname society.
4. With regard to the public hostility, violence, homo and transphobic attitudes promoted

by the media and music industry against LGBTII people, a formal complained against the
singer and the group that recorded the remix of the anti-gay song “Bullet” inciting
violence against LGBTI community7 was filed at the District Attorney’s office. Formally
the complaint has been received and would be investigated, but except for an official
note from the DA’s office, no further action or update on the complaint has been done.

1

The LGBT-platform Suriname itself is not a separate legal entity, however it consists of 3 formally established
organizations – Suriname Men United, Women’s Way Foundation and He+ HIV – and a social media-initiative: Proud 2 Be.
2
3
4

http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/Treaties/CCPR/Shared%20Documents/SUR/INT_CCPR_ICO_SUR_19176_E.pdf
Op. Cit.

Article 8.2 of the Surinamese constitution states: ‘No one may be discriminated against due to their birth, race, language,
religion, heritage, education, political views, economic position or social standing or any other status”
5

These legislative updates have been made on march 30th 2015 under S.B. 2015 no. 44 as part of the
overall revising of the Surinamese Penal Code.
6

In June 2011, a member of the Parliament, Ronny Asabina, described homosexuality as a “desviation” and a “disease”
that should be eradicated completely. Furthermore, he referred to the acknowledgement of same sex marriages as a
“European epidemic.” After this statement, the first public gay rights march took place in Suriname in October 2011.
http://www.surinamemenunited.com/informatie/krantenberichten-statement-asabina.html.
Mr. Frederik Finisie publicly stated that he is against homosexuals; in his own words ‘I don’t want to hear anything from
homosexuals. If it was up to me, they wouldn’t even exist’. http://www.dbsuriname.com/dbsuriname/index.php/ndpassembleelid-finisie-ik-ben-tegen-homos/
7
http://www.dbsuriname.com/dbsuriname/index.php/haatzaaiing-door-surinaamse muziekproductie-bullet/

5. Nevertheless, in May and June 2015 there were emerging (news) reports suggesting that

the Government of Suriname even assisted the same local music group with preparations
to tour through the Netherlands and other parts of Europe, enjoying also the support of
the then Minister of Foreign Affairs. After it was known that the group was touring
through the Netherlands; LGBTII organizations draw attention to the violence and
discrimination displayed by this group to ensure that they would be boycotted by the
event organizers8.

6. This lobby work has resulted in mayor media attention and public disapproval in both

the Netherlands and Suriname; with event organizers cancelling the shows and the
Surinamese Foreign Minister at the time gave statements in the media to clarify the
government’s involvement and attempted to explain his initial support for the group. A
formal complaint against the group was also filed in the Netherlands; for inciting
violence and hate against gays.9

Recommendations
The Suriname State should:
7. Take concrete legislative and political measures to eliminate social, cultural and political

discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity.

8. Enact policies and laws to eliminate inequalities that affect LGBTI persons in all areas of

their lives.
9. Adopt concrete measures to stop violence against LGBTI persons, in particular hatred-

speeches and harassment.

10. Implement nation-wide awareness-raising campaigns to eliminate prejudices against

LGBTI persons as well as to project a positive image of sexual and gender diversity.

Arbitrary arrest, harassment and torture of LGBTI persons:
Right to not be subjected to torture or to cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or
punishment; Right to personal liberty and security; Right to not be subject of arbitrary
arrest or detention; Right to receive human treatment in case of being deprived of
liberty (Articles 7, 9 and 10)
11. Although the Surinamese Constitution10 establishes the right to personal freedom and

security11 in reality this protection is lacking for LGBTI persons, particularly those of
LGBTI migrants. Arbitrary detentions, harassment and torture against LGBTI people –
especially transgender women- continue to be an usual practice of security forces in the
country.
12. Around may 2015 a homosexual man was arrested and thrown in a cell with other

inmates. During detention this man was verbally assaulted; beaten and treated
8

http://www.loopsuriname.com/content/dutch-labour-party-wants-hmg-prosecuted-if-they-play%E2%80%98bullet%E2%80%99
9
http://www.telegraaf.nl/binnenland/24259250/__Eerder_aangifte__homohaters___.html
http://www.dwtonline.com/laatste-nieuws/2015/08/19/openbaar-ministerie-nederland-onderzoekt-aangiftetegen-hmg/
10
. Surinamese Constitution, Article 16.2: ‘Every person has the right to personal freedom and security’
11
This obligation is also reflected in the Surinamese Penal Code. Het Surinaams Wetboek van Strafrecht

inhumane by fellow detainees because of his sexual orientation12 . The police did little to
stop or protect him while being detained. Further research learns that this man was
mentally unstable and needed psychiatric help and it is still unclear why he was arrested
and detained in a cell in the first place.13
13. In December 2014, a group of sex workers among which, transgender sex workers,

mainly from Guyana were detained on chargers that for the most part remained unclear.
These detentions coincided with many violations including violations pertaining to the
right to health (access to quality health care). It was reported by the detainees that they
were placed in a flooded cell, that they were exploited and that false reports about their
charges were made up.

Recommendations
Regarding the present report and our former one14
The Suriname State should:
14. Take concrete measures to eliminate arbitrary detentions, harassment and torture

against LGBTI persons that are perpetrated by the police forces and prison systems.
15. Implement programs to train police and prison forces in human rights issues and to

oversee their performance on the basis of a human treatment -without discrimination
and harassment- towards sex workers, in particular transgender women.

Prohibition of same-sex marriage, lack of civil and social marital rights and lack of
legislation and public policies regarding same-sex families:
Right to marriage, right to enjoy civil and social rights related to marriage (Articles 3, 23
and 26)
Recommendations
Regarding our former report
The Suriname State should:
16. Take concrete steps to guarantee that same-sex couples enjoy the same civil and social

rights that heterosexual couples.
17. Adopt concrete measures to amend legislation in order to recognize and guarantee the

right to marriage for same-sex couples

Discrimination and harassment against transgender persons in the workplace and
the school system:
Right to equal enjoyment of all civil and political rights; Right to not be subjected
to violence, harassment, cruel or degrading treatment; Right to freedom of
expression and to not be subject to arbitrary or unlawful interference with the
own privacy (Articles 3, 7, 17 and 19.2)

12

A video leaked from within the cell shows how fellow detainees verbally assault, physically harm and force
him to do humiliating things in the cell.
13
http://www.de-surinaamse-krant.com/2015/05/mishandeling-homo-gedetineerde-in-cel.html?m=1
14
http://tbinternet.ohchr.org/Treaties/CCPR/Shared%20Documents/SUR/INT_CCPR_ICO_SUR_19176_E.pdf

Recommendations
Regarding our former report15
The Suriname State should:
18. Take precise steps to end violence and related human rights violations committed

against individuals in their workplace because of their sexual orientation and gender
identity.
19. Elaborate and adopt measures to stop the violence exerted in the educational

system against students caused by cultural prejudices and intolerance on the
grounds of their gender identity or expression and sexual orientation.

20. Take the necessary steps to promote a cultural, social and political dialogue about

discrimination, violence and inequalities that affect the liberty and human rights
of LGBTI persons.

15

Op. Cit.

