Lithuania: Parliament to consider five separate anti-gay and anti-trans bills | PinkNews About Us Advertise Work with us Login Register Latest News View all UK US World Health Politics Sport Business Culture View all TV Film Celebrity Drag Theatre Music Gaming Lifestyle View all Beauty Careers Fashion Relationships Travel Shopping View all Deals Recommended Fashion & Beauty Tickets Video View all News & Politics Entertainment Lifestyle Discover Trans Awareness Week Drag Race Explainers The Queer Agenda Toggle menu Account Register Login Community Lithuania: Parliament to consider five separate anti-gay and anti-trans bills Sep 11 2013 Written by Aaron Day Share Save for later Comment Five separate anti-gay and anti-trans bills are set to be considered in the Lithuanian parliament later this year, including a ban on gender reassignment, a ban on same-sex adoption, regulations of public events, and a legalisation of anti-gay hate speech. The proposed bills are expected to be heard in December this year. The first proposed amendment is set to ban all transgender therapy and surgery in Lithuania. The amendment states that because Lithuanian society views “gender reassignment as very controversial”, it must therefore be prohibited. It adds: “Society is not ready to accept gender reassignment practices due to certain psychosocial reasons, and therefore the permission to undergo gender reassignment surgeries will lead to a number of medical and ethical issues.” The bill then goes on to state that gender “is determined genetically from the very moment of conception.” The second proposed amendment is to ban same-sex adoption on the grounds of protecting children. An accompanying note states: “Every child has the natural right to a father and a mother.” The third amendment aims to make organisers of public events, such as pride marches, liable to administrative charges and fines for the “public denigration of constitutional moral values,” with fines as high as €1800 (£1,500). The fourth amendment, yet to be formally placed on the agenda, aims to require such public events organisers to also cover expenses to ensure the “safety and order” of the public. Finally the fifth bill could see hate crime made legal, introducing an amendment to the Criminal Code, stating: “The criticism of sexual or sexual practices, convictions or beliefs, or persuasion to change this behavior, practices, convictions or beliefs cannot per se be qualified as harassment, denigration, incitement to hatred, discrimination or incitement to discrimination.” Last year, The European Parliament adopted a resolution condemning anti-gay laws in Europe, specifically calling on Russia, Moldova, Latvia, Lithuania as well as Ukraine to address existing and draft legislation and “demonstrate, and ensure respect for, the principle of non-discrimination.” Earlier this year, the Lithuanian Supreme Court was forced to overturn previous bans on Baltic Pride, after continuous pressure to allow the event to take place. In 2009, Lithuania’s parliament passed a bill banning information on homosexuality in schools or in media accessible by young people. In 2007, Lithuanian authorities also passed amendments to public order and cleanliness regulations, meaning that the police would be able to ban any event where they think a riot might occur, including gay pride events. More: Anti-gay anti-gay laws Crime Discrimination EU Europe Europe Gay Gay rights gender Homophobia Law LGBT LGBT rights Lithuania Lithuania propaganda reassignment same-sex adoption Trans Queer News. Straight Up. The LGBTQ+ stories you don’t want to miss, delivered to your inbox daily. Email address required Must be valid email Register By registering you agree to our Privacy Policy Thanks for registering! You can update your email subscriptions at any time in the My profile section of your account. Dec 31 2024 Every celebrity who came out as LGBTQ+ in 2024 Related articles US Feb 10 Republican governor vetoes anti-trans bill… yes, really US Jul 04 2025 Anti-trans provisions dropped from Trump’s ‘Big Beautiful Bill’ US Feb 28 2025 New Texas ‘trans ban’ bill aims to completely eradicate gender-affirming care in the state Europe Jan 09 2025 Lithuania Court rules against ‘gay propaganda’ law which ‘cast a shadow over the LGBTQ+ community’ US Nov 18 2024 Kentucky governor goes viral for explaining why he vetoed anti-trans bill: ‘Perfect answer’ Latest News Previous Next Celebrity Sep 25 Trans influencer calls out Nikki Glaser for stand-up joke about what’s ‘in her pants’ Culture Sep 25 Trans pro wrestling trailblazer Gisele Shaw signs exclusive NWA contract Bisexual Sep 25 The Traitors star Freddie Fraser’s mum’s emotional response to his coming out Celebrity Sep 25 Lili Reinhart says Hollywood ‘too afraid’ to greenlight lesbian vampire project Celebrity Sep 25 Carly Rae Jepsen describes moment Heated Rivalry inspired her son’s name Celebrity Sep 25 John Green ‘heartbroken’ for trans Harry Potter fans as he talks JK Rowling Current Affairs Sep 25 JD Vance claims James Talarico has a “weird obsession with children in drag” News Sep 25 Susan Sarandon, Hannah Einbinder and Caleb Hearon detained outside UN after protesting Netanyahu What to buy now Previous Next Fashion Mar 27 Connor Ives and MAC team up to re-release the iconic ‘Protect The Dolls’ t-shirt Music Mar 12 The Pussycat Dolls confirm reunion with new single and tour – how to get tickets Music Jan 23 A full guide to the 2026 Harry Styles Together, Together tour including dates and presale info Shopping Nov 24 2025 Ten truly awesome Christmas gifts you can buy to support queer-owned businesses Trans Sep 09 2025 Lush creates ‘luxurious’ trans flag bath bomb to support trans charities Tickets Jun 25 2025 Dolly Parton announces mini Las Vegas residency after wrapping her last tour almost a decade ago Shopping May 15 2025 LEGO celebrates late gay icon Keith Haring with new art set: ‘Want this so bad’ Music Apr 18 2025 Primavera Sound’s most iconic queer performances, from Troye Sivan to Ethel Cain Exclusive Previous Next Exclusive Sep 11 Ania Magliano talks SNL UK season two and anti-LGBTQ voices in comedy: ‘We do edgy in the right way’ Exclusive Sep 11 Elliot Tuttle on Blue Film’s personal inspiration, rejection and taboo: ‘It’s about loneliness’ Exclusive Sep 09 OF star Andy Lee on love for gay fans, ‘poisonous’ creators and ‘harmful’ stunts: ‘Gay men lift me up every day’ Exclusive Sep 07 Real Housewives of London spill the tea: ‘She’d go to the opening of a packet of crisps’ Opinion Sep 04 Katseye in London: A showcase of real talent deserving of the deafening screams Exclusive Sep 02 Adrian Chiarella and Joe Bird on tackling conversion therapy in gay horror Leviticus Exclusive Aug 21 Sziget Festival drag and circus troupe want audiences to feel like family Exclusive Aug 20 Gay wrestler Anthony Bowens says Heated Rivalry shows authentic life of closeted athletes Register to save articles and more. It'll only take a minute and it's free. JOIN US TODAY! Already have an account? Log in here "/> Download the PinkNews app Award winning LGBTQ+ journalism About us Editorial Policy Contact us Advertise Work for us Terms and conditions Privacy policy Privacy manager Privacy Manager