Viet Nam | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Viet Nam At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Legal Gender Recognition Possible? Yes LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? Yes Last Update: March 12, 2026 Since the country gained independence from France in 1945, the Vietnamese government has enacted some important legal reforms for LGBTIQ individuals, such as the removal of same-sex unions from the list of forbidden relationships and the withdrawal of a clause prohibiting transgender people from changing their legal gender. But tangible progress has not always followed. For instance, while a law granting official recognition to transgender people was supposed to be implemented in 2017, transgender people still face obstacles to accessing gender-affirming health care and changing their legal gender markers on identification documents. A draft law would provide for the right of trans people to undergo gender-affirming surgery, but it is still under consideration as of February 2026. LGBTIQ organizations can operate and work openly on issues related to sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, and sex characteristics, although they face government surveillance, as do other NGOs. In August 2022, the Vietnamese Health Ministry officially stated that same-sex sexual attraction and transgender identity are not mental health disorders, in concurrence with global health and human rights standards. The same statement also condemns “conversion therapy.” However, there is no law prohibiting nonconsensual medical interventions on intersex youth. LGBTIQ persons face societal discrimination, stigma, and family pressure to conform to cisheteronormative lifestyles. A 2020 report highlighted the high levels of verbal harassment and, in certain cases, physical violence faced by LGBT youth in Vietnamese schools and the lack of adequate responses by school administrations. Lesbian, bisexual, and queer women in Vietnam experience online gender-based violence , including cyberstalking and hate speech, and do not always report such cases or access services for survivors due to the lack of clear reporting processes or mistrust in service providers. In addition, some activists fear a reversal of recent progress , after administrative restrictions and cancellations affected some Pride-related events in 2025. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International