Reports of discrimination targeting LGBTQ jumped 81 pct. in the Netherlands since 2022 | NL Times Skip to main content Toggle navigation Main navigation Top stories Health Crime Politics Business Tech Culture Sports Weird 1-1-2 Image Hands painted in the rainbow colors of the Pride flag, forming a heart - Credit: AndrewLozovyi / DepositPhotos - License: DepositPhotos Crime lgbtqia+ discrimination transgender violence police Public Prosecution Service OM » More tags « Less tags Sunday, 19 April 2026 - 08:15 Share this article: Opens in a new window Opens in a new window Opens in a new window Opens in a new window Opens in a new window Opens in a new window Reports of discrimination targeting LGBTQ jumped 81 pct. in the Netherlands since 2022 The number of reports of violence and discrimination against people from the LGBTQIA+ community has nearly doubled since 2022. Reports of discrimination against transgender people specifically jumped 51 percent in a year, interest organizations COC and Transgender Netwerk reported based on police figures released on Wednesday. Last year, the authorities received 4,800 reports of discrimination or violence against LGBTQIA+ individuals. That is a 7.5 percent increase compared to 2024. Compared to 2022, the number of reports nearly doubled, jumping 81 percent from 2,654. COC spoke of an “extremely worrying development,” pointing to a recent report by the Public Prosecution Service (OM) showing that only six people were convicted of discriminating against LGBTQIA+ individuals last year. Data from the Transgender Network shows that the number of reports specifically about discrimination against transgender people rose 51 percent, from 264 unique reports in 2024 to 399 unique reports last year. These are reports to the regional anti-discrimination offices and Transgender Network itself. That is a terrible development, said Remke Verdegem, chairman of the Transgender Netwerk. “Transgender people who no one cared about ten years ago are now being verbally abused and threatened constantly.” “We want to be a country where everyone can be visibly themselves, whoever you are and whoever you love,” a COC spokesperson said. “We call on the Jetten Cabinet to take action against discrimination against the rainbow community and other minorities.” The total number of discrimination reports also increased explosively, jumping 54 percent from 26,078 in 2024 to 40,077 last year. The bulk of the increase was due to over 14,000 discrimination reports filed against PVV leader Geert Wilders about a post he made on X. More like this Image Eindhoven man made victims carve his nickname into their bodies in violent chat groups Image Ethnicity definitely plays a role in the Dutch criminal justice system, study finds Image Two more Rotterdam teens arrested for assaulting trans person in Amsterdam home Image Four more convicted in Ajax-Maccabi Tel Aviv riots; Amsterdam police seek 122 suspects Follow us: Latest stories AZ striker Mexx Meerdink scores twice as Oranje beat Serbia 2-1 for Xavi's first win Maastricht University suspends Gazan student after post claiming Oct. 7 Israel attack 15,000 parents take first-aid courses for young children, up from 9,000 in 2022 Merwede Bridge on the A27 reopens after early finish of weight-cutting work Rarely lent Matisse art to be shown at H’ART Museum in Amsterdam from Oct. 3 to Feb. 14 Top stories Insiders allege PM Jetten wants to scrap benefit cuts, speed Box 3 tax shift Five arrested after 2 stabbed in Eindhoven Flash fire at neighbourhood barbecue injured 8 in De Wilp Victim of NDSM shooting in Amsterdam-Noord may have known his killer from prison The weekend is expected to be mostly dry; Temperatures could reach 29°C Tuesday © 2012-2026, NL Times, All rights reserved. Footer menu Change Privacy Settings Privacy Policy Contact Partner Content