Aruba Parliament approves civil unions for same-sex couples Search Query for Search the web Search with Yahoo Scout Search the web Skip to main Home News Finance Sports More Mail Search the web Advertisement Advertisement Return to Homepage Top Stories: Mass shootings in South Africa leave 27 dead 'Major incident' near U.S. air base Nor'easter batters East Coast Trump's 'pocket rescission' Talarico's lead narrows White House blocks CNN Trump rejects Iran ceasefire OpenAI probes user data leak Trump cuts $1B, sets deadline ICE sweeps may hit beef prices Follow Aruba Parliament approves civil unions for same-sex couples Associated Press Fri, September 9, 2016 at 9:08 PM UTC Add Yahoo as a preferred source to see more of our stories on Google. ORANJESTAD, Aruba (AP) — Lawmakers in Aruba have voted to grant same-sex couples the right to register their unions and receive benefits granted to married people on the Dutch Caribbean island. Parliament voted 11-5 with four abstentions late Thursday to amend civil code regulations related to marriage to cover same-sex unions. Those articles include such things as the right to a spouse's pension in case of death or to make emergency medical decisions. Aruba is one of the constituent countries that make up the Kingdom of the Netherlands. Same-sex couples previously could marry in the Netherlands and return to have their marriage certificate recognized under a law obligating recognition of official documents throughout the kingdom. Advertisement Advertisement Advertisement Advertisement Desiree de Sousa Croes, the member of Parliament who introduced the legislation, was among those who married in the Netherlands and returned to have the certificate recognized in Aruba, where many people oppose same-sex unions on religious and cultural grounds. "I would have wanted same-sex marriage," Croes said after the vote. "But this amendment will eliminate the need to travel to the Netherlands to marry, as our laws will soon provide rights for same sex couples." Aruba has been under pressure in recent years from LGBT rights advocates to allow same-sex marriage but religious groups have opposed the effort. The opposition also fought civil unions as the bill came to a vote. Neither of the other two Dutch constituent countries in the Caribbean, Sint Maarten and Curacao, allow same-sex marriage or civil unions. Advertisement About Our Ads About Our Ads Advertisement Advertisement Advertisement Yahoo! US Politics 2024 Election World Health Science The 360 Contact Us Originals Help Share Your Feedback About Us About Our Ads Site Map Follow us on Download our app © 2026 Yahoo. All rights reserved. View comments