Malawi: Arrests, Violence against LGBT People | Human Rights Watch Skip to cookie privacy notice Skip to main content العربية 简中 繁中 English Français Deutsch 日本語 Português Русский Español More languages Search Donate Now Countries Topics Reports Videos & Photos Impact About Join Us Give Now Close Search Search Primary navigation Countries Africa All Africa African Union Angola Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Central African Republic Chad Côte d'Ivoire Democratic Republic of Congo Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini (formerly Swaziland) Ethiopia Gambia Ghana Guinea Kenya Liberia Malawi Mali Mauritius Mozambique Niger Nigeria Rwanda Senegal Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Americas All Americas Argentina Bolivia Brazil Canada Chile Colombia Costa Rica Cuba Dominican Republic Ecuador El Salvador Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Uruguay Venezuela Asia All Asia Afghanistan Australia Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China and Tibet Fiji India Indonesia Japan Laos Malaysia Maldives Myanmar (Burma) Nauru Nepal North Korea Pakistan Papua New Guinea Philippines Singapore South Korea Sri Lanka Taiwan Thailand Timor-Leste Vietnam Europe/Central Asia All Europe/Central Asia Albania Armenia Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czech Republic Denmark European Union France Georgia Germany Greece Holy See Hungary Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Latvia Lithuania Netherlands Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia Serbia/Kosovo Spain Sweden Switzerland Tajikistan Türkiye Turkmenistan Ukraine United Kingdom Uzbekistan Middle East/North Africa All Middle East/North Africa Algeria Bahrain Egypt Iran Iraq Israel/Palestine Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Libya Mauritania Morocco/Western Sahara Oman Qatar Saudi Arabia Syria Tunisia United Arab Emirates Yemen United States All United States Criminal Justice Democracy Economic Justice Immigrants’ Rights and Border Policy Racial Justice US Foreign Policy Topics Arms Cluster Munitions Killer Robots Landmines Explosive Weapons in Populated Areas Incendiary Weapons Children's Rights Education Attacks on Education Children Separated from Families Children and Armed Conflict Child Labor Youth Justice Migrant and Refugee Children Intersex Children Crisis and Conflict Disability Rights Shackling Economic Justice and Rights Corporate Accountability Poverty and Inequality Environment and Human Rights Climate Change Deforestation Fossil Fuels Free Speech Press Freedom Religious Freedom Health Sexual and Reproductive Health Detention Centers Disasters and Displaced Populations Environment and Health Health Care Access HIV/AIDS and Tuberculosis Palliative Care Attacks on Health LGBT Rights Refugees and Migrants Asylum Seekers Internally Displaced People Exploitation, Forced Labor & Trafficking Rights of Older People International Justice International Criminal Court Peace and Justice Sport and Human Rights Technology and Rights Digital Investigations Lab Terrorism / Counterterrorism CIA Activities Detention without Trial Edward Snowden Guantanamo Guantanamo - Military Commissions Targeted Killings and Drones Torture United Nations Human Rights Council Women's Rights Forced Marriage Gender Based Violence Domestic Workers Gender Equality Reproductive Rights Sexual Violence Labor Rights Sex Work Women and Armed Conflict Women’s Health Reports Video & Photos Impact Join Us Newsletters Our Committees Film Festival Legacies for Justice About About Us History Newsletters Careers People Board of Directors Advisory Committees Social Media Human Rights Education Partners Partner Resources Financials and Fundraising Policy Accessibility Contact Give Now Make a One-time Gift Give Monthly Gifts in Wills and Trusts Matching Gifts Partners for Justice Stock or Wire Transfer Give from Your IRA Donate Now Search Search English Choose your language Close العربية 简中 繁中 English Français Deutsch 日本語 Português Русский Español More Languages Donate Now Open the main menu Trending Russia-Ukraine War Israel/Palestine Trump Administration and Human Rights Crisis in the Middle East International Criminal Court Would you like to read this page in another language? Yes No, don't ask again ✕ Close Would you like to see a version of this page that loads faster by showing text only? Yes No, don't ask again ✕ Close Human Rights Watch Malawi: Arrests, Violence against LGBT People Print Donate Now October 26, 2018 10:00AM EDT | News Release Available In English Français Malawi: Arrests, Violence against LGBT People Repeal Laws; Moratorium Not Enough Share this via Facebook Share this via Bluesky Share this via X Share this via WhatsApp Share this via Email More sharing options Share this via LinkedIn Share this via Reddit Share this via Telegram Share this via Printer Play Video (Banjul, October 26, 2018) – Malawi ’s laws prohibiting consensual same-sex relations foster a climate of fear and fuel violence and discrimination, Human Rights Watch said in a report released today. The punitive legal environment combined with social stigma allows police abuse to go unchecked and prevents many lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender (LGBT) people from reporting violence or getting medical care. The 61-page report, “‘ Let Posterity Judge’: Violence and Discrimination against LGBT People in Malawi ,” shows how the lack of clarity about the legal status of same-sex conduct leaves LGBT people vulnerable to arbitrary arrests, physical violence, and routine discrimination. The justice minister issued a moratorium on arrests for adult consensual same-sex conduct in 2012, but there are divergent views about its legality. “The law criminalizing same-sex conduct contributes to a perception that LGBT people are fair game and can be assaulted without any consequences for the attacker,” said Wendy Isaack , LGBT rights researcher at Human Rights Watch. “Imagine being beaten up in the street, reporting to the police, and being arrested yourself while your attacker goes free – this happened to people we interviewed, solely because of their perceived gender identity or sexual orientation.” Human Rights Watch interviewed 45 LGBT people in Lilongwe and Blantyre as well as lawyers, activists, and government representatives. Researchers found a number of cases in which police arbitrarily arrested and detained transgender people and, in some cases, physically assaulted them. Some medical professionals denied people services based on their sexual orientation or gender identity. Sections 153 and 156 of Malawi's Criminal Code prohibit "unnatural offenses" and "indecent practices between males.” After a high-profile arrest and conviction in 2010 that resulted in international condemnation, the Ministry of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, in 2012, issued a moratorium on arrests and prosecutions for consensual homosexual acts. In December 2015, justice minister Samuel Tembenu reaffirmed the 2012 moratorium but a year later, following successful litigation initiated by Christian religious leaders, the Mzuzu High Court issued an order suspending the moratorium pending judicial review. As the law stands, adult consensual same-sex conduct is punishable by up to 14 years in prison for men and five years for women. Human Rights Watch found that people whose gender expression differs from social expectations, including transgender people whom the police and public perceive as lesbian or gay, appear most likely to be targeted. Olivia, a transgender woman, told Human Rights Watch that a mob assaulted her friend, also a transgender woman, in a market in Lilongwe. Rather than arresting the attackers, the police arrested her friend because they suspected she was “gay.” Then they came looking for Olivia, but she wasn’t home, so they arrested her father. “I went to the police station to look for him and when I arrived, three police officers took me into a small office inside the police station to question me,” said Olivia. “One of the officers said that because of the way I look and dress, I must be gay. They started slapping and punching me, forcing me to confess that I am ‘gay.’” October 26, 2018 “Let Posterity Judge” Violence and Discrimination against LGBT people in Malawi Download the full report in English Download the annex of the report in English Human Rights Watch spoke to several people who had been denied medical care because of their appearance and gender identity. Eric, a transgender man, was beaten up for being a “lesbian.” When his friend took him to the hospital, nurses refused to treat him. “I was given panados [pain relief tablets] but no other medication, no x-rays or checking of anything else – in fact the nurses said I should come back the next day dressed like a proper lady and only then will they give me proper treatment.” Transgender women and men who have sex with men have been denied HIV tests and treatments by nurses in public hospitals. Human Rights Watch was told several stories of nurses calling their colleagues into a treatment room to laugh at someone who had come in to be tested for HIV, and then refusing to administer the tests. Malawian authorities’ lack of willingness to repeal the anti-homosexuality laws inhibits people from seeking services, including HIV prevention, testing, and treatment, and compromises their right to the highest attainable standard of health. It is well-established that punitive legal environments constitute a significant barrier to access to sexual health treatment and services for gay and bisexual men and other men who have sex with men. Human Rights Watch’s research suggests that transgender people experience the same barriers. Malawi should decriminalize consensual same-sex conduct to ensure the safety and protection of all its citizens. “Discrimination against LGBT people is rife in Malawi and is creating an atmosphere in which some of its most vulnerable citizens are afraid to seek out police assistance or potentially life-saving medical care,” Isaack said. “The Malawi government should make sure that all of its citizens can live safely and free from persecution.” Your tax deductible gift can help stop human rights violations and save lives around the world. $50 $100 $250 $500 $1000 Other $ Donate Now Region / Country Malawi Topic LGBT Rights More Reading August 21, 2017 Letter Malawi: Letter to Human Rights Commission re Public Inquiry into LGBTI Rights December 21, 2015 News Release Malawi: Moratorium on Anti-Gay Arrests Reaffirmed Reports October 26, 2018 Report “Let Posterity Judge” Violence and Discrimination against LGBT people in Malawi More Reading August 21, 2017 Letter Malawi: Letter to Human Rights Commission re Public Inquiry into LGBTI Rights December 21, 2015 News Release Malawi: Moratorium on Anti-Gay Arrests Reaffirmed Most Viewed January 15, 2026 Report Syria: Accountability Lacking for Sweida Abuses June 14, 2018 News Release Africa: Pregnant Girls, Young Mothers Barred from School September 8, 2016 News Release Nepal: Child Marriage Threatens Girls’ Futures May 17, 2021 Report “Years Don’t Wait for Them” September 27, 2026 Report Syria: Reconstruction Deals Lack Critical Rights Framework Share this via Facebook Share this via Bluesky Share this via X Share this via WhatsApp Share this via Email More sharing options Share this via LinkedIn Share this via Reddit Share this via Telegram Share this via Printer Protecting Rights, Saving Lives Human Rights Watch defends the rights of people in close to 100 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justice Donate Now Get updates on human rights issues from around the globe. Join our movement today. Enter an email address Leave blank Leave blank Leave blank Processing.. Thank you for signing up! An error occurred while subscribing your email address. Please try again. Get Updates On Rights Issues Worldwide Leave blank Leave blank Leave blank Sign Up Connect With Us BlueSky X Facebook YouTube Instagram LinkedIn TikTok Footer menu Contact Us Corrections Privacy Policy Permissions Site Map Child Safeguarding Text Version © 2026 Human Rights Watch Human Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700 Human Rights Watch is a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808 Human Rights Watch