Reimagining our Future: A Recap of the Asia Pacific Transgender Network Convening in the Pacific Islands – Asia Pacific Transgender Network Skip to content Search About Our Mission & Vision Our Approach Team Events Calendar Media kit Translations Work with us Contact Issues Children, Youth, and Family Combatting Stigma and Discrimination Emergency Response and Humanitarian Aid Health and Well-being Human Rights Violation Monitoring and Reporting Intersectionality Legal Gender Recognition Migrant, Refugee and Asylum Violence Others Resources Special Projects All Special Projects Trans Health Module Trans Thrive Project News Support Us About Our Mission & Vision Our Approach Team Events Calendar Media kit Translations Work with us Contact Issues Children, Youth, and Family Combatting Stigma and Discrimination Emergency Response and Humanitarian Aid Health and Well-being Human Rights Violation Monitoring and Reporting Intersectionality Legal Gender Recognition Migrant, Refugee and Asylum Violence Others Resources Special Projects All Special Projects Trans Health Module Trans Thrive Project News Support Us Search Cookies on the APTN website We've placed cookies on your device to improve your browsing experience. They're safe and don't contain sensitive information. If you want, you can change your cookies through your browser settings. If you continue without changing your settings, we'll assume you're ok to receive all cookies on the APTN website. For more information view our privacy policy. I understand Reimagining our Future: A Recap of the Asia Pacific Transgender Network Convening in the Pacific Islands Published May 9, 2024 Locations Cook Islands Fiji Hawaii Niue Papua New Guinea Samoa Tahiti Tokelau Tonga Issues Health and Well-being Intersectionality Others Language English In late April in Nadi, Fiji, the Asia Pacific Transgender Network (APTN) convened a gathering that brought together gender diverse activists, advocates, and allies from across the region. The Pacific Islands have historically been home to many cultural gender identities, such as Fa’afafine or Fa’atama (Samoa, American Samoa), Fakaleiti or Leiti (Tonga), Fakafifine (Niue), Akava’ine (Cook Islands), Vakasalewalewa (Fiji), Palopa (Papua New Guinea), Mahu (Hawaii), Haka huahine (Tokelau), and Rae rae (Tahiti) (shortened to MVPFAFF+ communities ). From April 27th to 30th, participants engaged in a dynamic exchange of ideas, experiences, and strategies aimed at advancing the rights and well-being of MVPFAFF+, trans, and gender diverse communities in the Pacific Islands. Participants came from Samoa, Cook Islands, Vanuatu, Kiribati, Fiji, Tonga, West Papua, and Papua New Guinea. The convening kicked off with a reflective forum discussion, providing a space for attendees to assess the current landscape of MVPFAFF+ and trans advocacy in the Pacific. Past initiatives were revisited, successes celebrated, and gaps identified. This introspective session set the stage for deeper exploration throughout the event, fostering a sense of collective understanding and purpose. Central to the gathering was the opportunity for participants to share the experiences and challenges faced by their respective organisations and communities. Through honest and trustful dialogue, attendees highlighted pressing issues, ranging from healthcare access, forms of violence, and lack of resources for movements, that continue to impact trans and gender diverse individuals across the region. These discussions served not only to raise awareness but also to galvanise support and solidarity among attendees. One of the key objectives of the convening was to identify gaps within the MVPFAFF+ and Trans rights movements and explore avenues for support, for this session, APTN invited three colleagues from two donor organisations, namely Urgent Action Fund and the US Department of State. Attendees engaged in a focused exercise on movement funding and donor prospecting, recognizing the critical importance of sustainable resources in driving meaningful change. Additionally, discussions centred on capacity building, threat assessment, and seizing opportunities for growth and collaboration. Participants also brought up the lack of representation from the Pacific in APTN’s works and their difficulties applying for grants from both APTN and the grant space that are largely dependent on donors selecting countries to operate in. We’ve taken note of this feedback at APTN, developing strategies to foster a more inclusive and collaborative relationship with the Pacific community will be one of our greatest priorities. A highlight of the convening was the exploration of movement building and accountability. APTN and attendees exchanged frameworks and practices for nurturing inclusive and effective advocacy efforts, emphasising the importance of knowledge sharing, coalition building, and strategic advocacy. Through workshops and interactive sessions, participants gained valuable insights into building alliances and fostering collaboration at local, regional, and global stages. The spirit of openness and collaboration permeated every aspect of the convening, culminating in an inspiring dialogue between APTN and stakeholders from the Pacific region. Participants explored opportunities for partnership and mutual support, recognizing the power of collective action in driving meaningful change. On the last day of the convening, APTN organised a well-being trip to Mala Mala Island. Addressing the growing issue of activist burnout, this trip is important to renew the energy and a shared commitment to advancing MVPFAFF+, trans and gender diverse people rights in the Asia Pacific. Armed with refreshing insights, connections, and strategies, they have returned to their respective communities, ready to continue the fight for equality and justice. In retrospect, the Asia Pacific Transgender Network convening was not just a gathering of individuals; it was a tribute to the resilience, solidarity, and unwavering determination of MVPFAFF+ and gender diverse communities across the region. As we look to the future, may the bonds forged and lessons learned serve as catalysts for transformative change, paving the way for a more inclusive and equitable society for all. Published May 9, 2024 Categories Workshop/Webinar Issues Health and Well-being Intersectionality Others Work Approach Conference/Convening Locations Cook Islands Fiji Hawaii Niue Papua New Guinea Samoa Tahiti Tokelau Tonga Share this post Related News Resources Fellowship Resources: Right to Heal (An SRHR Handbook) Created by our fellow Denuka Chaturanga and his organisation Changing Seeds , this resource responds to the real, lived needs of transgender people in Sri Lanka addressing access to accurate information, bodily autonomy, dignity, and rights within our local social,... Locations: Sri Lanka Partners: Changing Seeds Issues: Health and Well-being News Thailand’s universal healthcare initiative now covers hormone therapy for transgender and gender-diverse Thai citizens On the 7th of June 2026, the National Health Security Office (NHSO) of Thailand announced that Thailand’s Universal Healthcare Scheme (also known as the B30 Scheme or Gold Card), now provides Gender Affirming Healthcare to Thai transgender and gender-diverse citizens. The... Categories: News Locations: Thailand Issues: Health and Well-being Stay Connected Sign up for to receive latest news, publications, and resources from the Asia Pacific Transgender Network. Subscribe * indicates required Email Address * © 2026 Asia Pacific Transgender Network. Terms and Conditions Data Privacy Policy Whistleblowing Policy Built with WordPress , hosted by Pressable.