Bulgaria | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Bulgaria At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Legal Gender Recognition Possible? No LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? No Last Update: March 12, 2026 Bulgaria decriminalized same-sex relations in 1968. Antidiscrimination laws that were put into place in 2004 protected against “direct” and “indirect” discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation. The laws provided for equal protection in access to housing, education, and medication. In 2015, amendments to the antidiscrimination laws expanded protections based on “sex,” including “sex change.” However, Article 46 of the Bulgarian Constitution institutionalizes discrimination by prohibiting same-sex marriage , restricting the right to marriage to “men and women.” In 2020, a same-sex couple filed a case before the European Court of Human Rights, Koilova and Babulkova v. Bulgaria , challenging the lack of recognition of same-sex relationships. The applicants argued that such a status was required to uphold the state’s duty to protect the family and private lives of its people, an obligation under the European Convention on Human Rights. The 2023 ruling found Bulgaria in violation of its obligations to respect family life and privacy. However, the government has refused to amend its laws to provide equal treatment to those in same-sex relationships. In contrast, Bulgarian anti-LGBTIQ laws are emerging rapidly and in violation of its obligations under the European Convention on Human Rights, earning criticism from the Council of Europe. In 2023, the Bulgarian Supreme Court ruled that transgender people would no longer be able to change their legal names and gender markers. It explicitly banned “the change of the data regarding the sex, name, and uniform civil status in the acts of civil status of an applicant who claims to be transgender.“ This ruling contravenes the jurisprudence of the European Court of Human Rights in Y.T. v. Bulgaria (2020), which found Bulgaria to be in violation of the right to privacy and family life with the failure of its domestic courts to grant accessible legal gender recognition to its applicants. In 2024, Parliament introduced a draft law resembling Russian-style laws banning “foreign” funding for organizations, branding them “foreign agents,” restricting their freedom of association, and stigmatizing working with international movements. In the same year, Bulgaria adopted a law amending the Pre-School and School Education Act to prohibit “carrying out propaganda, promotion or incitement in any way, directly or indirectly, of ideas and views related to non-traditional sexual orientation and/or the definition of gender identity other than the biological one.” In 2025, far-right parties in Bulgaria aimed to pass two bills that seek to ban “displays of LGBTIQ content” in public, also utilizing the language of protecting children, while at the same time criminalizing medical professionals who provide gender-affirming care to transgender teenagers. The second bill aims to target legal gender recognition and to amend the Personal Documents Act to statutorily prohibit access to legal gender recognition, codifying the regressive 2023 Supreme Court ruling. Conversion practices are common in Bulgaria, with 31 percent of LGBTIQ respondents reporting in 2023 that they had experienced conversion practices in their lifetime, higher than the 24 percent European Union average. Intersex infants and children are not protected from harmful nonconsensual medical interventions. Politicians strategically engage in hateful rhetoric and propose hostile legislation during election periods. In the run-up to the 2024 elections, Sofia Pride, an LGBTIQ organization, asked candidates to sign a declaration on the fulfillment of the rights of LGBTIQ persons. Only 28 of over 6,000 candidates signed the declaration before the June 2024 elections, while a mere 13 of nearly 5,000 candidates signed it ahead of the October 2024 elections. During the parliamentary debate on the Law on Amending the Pre-school and School Education Act, MPs made derogatory comments about LGBTIQ people. After the law’s passing, several far-right and other groups vocally called for the immediate implementation of the law, including demanding the revocation of the LGBTIQ youth organization Single Step ’s license to work with minors. In 2024, only 22 percent of respondents surveyed said that the country is a “good place” for gay and lesbian people. In a 2023 survey, only 26 percent of respondents agreed with the statement “The rights of LGBTI+ people, including the right to marry, should be guaranteed.” View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International