Calgary pastor faces multiple charges after disrupting drag storytime | Xtra Magazine Skip to content Xtra Magazine Xtra Magazine Need A Suggestion? We got You... Addiction · Arts · Asexuality · Bisexuality · Blood Ban · Coming Out · Conversion therapy · Cruising · Disability · Discrimination · Education · Faith & Spirituality · Fetish & Kink · Gender identity · History · HIV/AIDS · Human Rights · Indigenous · Marriage Equality · Parenting · Policing · Pride · Race issues · Sex education · Social justice · Trans · Two-Spirit · Youth Power Activism Identity Politics Dispatches Protest and Pleasure Series Culture Drag Race Books Music Monthly Tune-Up Playlist Q TV & Film Queer Culture Catchup Queer View Mirror Love & Sex Dating Relationships Ask Kai Love Like Mine Essays Health Sexual Health Mental Health Trans Health Reproductive Health Ask an Expert Video After the Sashay Ask Kai: Quickies Inspired Lucky Stars My Queer Kitchen Speed Date Queer Artists in a Pandemic About us Xtra is an online magazine and community platform covering LGBTQ2S+ culture, politics and health. We aim to break boundaries, think outside of binaries and build bridges within our communities and beyond. Get free Xtra newsletters Xtra is being blocked on Facebook and Instagram for Canadians as part of Meta’s response to Bill C18. Stay connected, and tell a friend. Subscribe Now Our principles Inside Xtra The Latest Podcasts Follow Us: facebook twitter youtube instagram tiktok reddit RSS Power Calgary pastor faces multiple charges after disrupting drag storytime While many drag events have been cancelled or postponed in Calgary over the last few months, as threats and protests escalate, a local historian says this type of backlash isn’t new By Julia Peterson • March 9, 2023 2:01 pm EDT Credit: CC Wikimedia Amidst a rising tide of anti-LGBTQ2S+ and anti-drag protests in Calgary, a pastor is facing multiple charges after disrupting a drag storytime event at one of the city’s public libraries. Derek Reimer, 36, is accused of “aggressively enter[ing] a library classroom” and shouting homophobic and transphobic slurs at the parents and children who came to Calgary’s Seton Public Library for a Reading with Royalty event in February, according to the Calgary Police Service. In a statement, police said “several individuals were … scaring the children while causing a disturbance and subsequently refusing to leave.” Library staff, helped by two of the event attendees, removed the protestors from the room before the police arrived. Now, Reimer has been charged with one count of disturbing the peace and one count of mischief. Advertisement Police say a “hate motivation”—where an offender was motivated by bias, prejudice or hate based on the personal characteristics of a victim—won’t lead to any additional charges. However, “any evidence of it is considered by the courts after a person is found guilty of the connected crime,” police said. “If the judge decides during sentencing that hate was a motivation for the offence, it is an aggravating factor that can add to the convicted person’s sentence.” Get free Xtra newsletters Xtra is being blocked on Facebook and Instagram for Canadians as part of Meta’s response to Bill C18. Stay connected, and tell a friend. Subscribe Now In addition to these criminal charges, City of Calgary peace officers—who can enforce specific statues, but not the full Criminal Code—have also charged Reimer with six counts of harassment. Each of these charges carries a potential penalty of up to $10,000 or six months in prison. Last July, Calgary City Council passed a bylaw that specifically prohibits insulting or demeaning behaviour, including harassing anyone on the basis of sexual orientation, gender, gender identity or gender expression. The bylaw applies in all the city’s public spaces, including libraries. “These amendments were created as a clear message that Calgary is a place everyone should feel welcome and safe, and free from harassment,” said Ryan Pleckaitis, chief of Community Standards for the City of Calgary. And in February, Mayor Jyoti Gondek said the city would also start using the city’s new street harassment bylaw to levy fines against people participating in “hate-fuelled” demonstrations. 1/4 Saddened & frustrated @chinookblast had to cancel a much anticipated show with talented performers this weekend. Why? Because of planned protests rooted in hate & fear-mongering. I respect the decision & the need to prioritize public & performer safety. But this cannot go on. — Jyoti Gondek (@JyotiGondek) February 10, 2023 But those charges have also been levelled against Calgarians counter-protesting homophobic and transphobic groups. In February, as two teenagers and their mother were leaving a counter-protest against an anti-LGBTQ2S+ group, the three were charged under the city’s excessive noise and anti-street harassment bylaws. Those charges have since been dropped. Reimer remained in jail until March 8, refusing to agree to release conditions ordering him to stay away from LGBTQ2S+ people and events. In court on March 6, Reimer’s defence lawyer Ben Allison said these conditions would be “impossible to satisfy.” Two days later, however, Reimer changed his mind, agreed to the conditions and was released. But weeks after the Reading with Royalty storytime was disrupted, the library says staff, patrons and community members are still shaken by what happened. “The right to protest is fundamental to our democracy, but what happened … was not a protest,” Calgary Public Library (CPL) said in a statement . “It was an organized, targeted and intimidating disruption of a program in a space where small children were present.” During Reading with Royalty storytimes, which are led by local drag performers, children are invited to come to the library in their best outfit, cape or crown. “The program is a popular, family-friendly event that celebrates inclusion and imagination through stories and songs,” CPL said. “All performers and staff complete training to ensure that events are kid-friendly and entertaining. The suggestion that it is anything else is categorically untrue and rooted in misinformation and intolerance.” Though CPL has partnered with Calgary Pride to host Reading with Royalty events for more than five years, it has decided to postpone these storytimes for now, until “we can be sure that we can provide a safe and fun environment for kids and families that wish to attend,” the library said. The library system is not alone in making this decision. In recent months, queer establishments in the city have received threatening phone calls and messages, and scheduled drag performances during Calgary’s winter festival were cancelled due to fears for the performers’ safety. But community advocates and historians say the queer community in Calgary has faced moments like this before, and can withstand and overcome these protests too. Advertisement Kevin Allen is the lead researcher with the Calgary Gay History Project . For Allen, watching the increasing backlash against the LGBTQ2S+ communities across North America in recent months and years has been alarming—and familiar. “We were a very marginalized community for most of the 20th century—and a criminalized community,” he said. “And any time we started to agitate for our rights, or even made ourselves visible, there was backlash. So this is reminiscent of previous backlashes. “There’s a continuum in history, and there’s a pendulum of hate that swings back and forth. And I think the pendulum of hate is swinging again.” But Allen says there are some critical differences this time. “I think society at large, if I can make that generalization, is on our side, and this sort of anti-queer protest is fairly fringe,” he said. “With previous historical cycles, it was society that was against us and we were the fringe group. So there have been some profound positive changes.” Allen points to the many public statements of support from local elected leaders, and the enforcement of harassment and hate crime-related laws, as positive signs for Calgary’s queer community. The 2SLGBTQIA+ community deserves our firm and public support. #yyc #yyccc https://t.co/sDS7Kiql4E pic.twitter.com/gqtuOrZvmi — Courtney Walcott (@CWalcottYYC) March 7, 2023 Despite the protests and the current backlash to queer rights and queer life, Allen says he is hopeful that we are nearing the end of a historical era of intolerance. “I wonder, if we can zoom out and look at the larger historical lens, maybe this is the last gasp of homophobia and transphobia,” said Allen. “Society has changed so fundamentally in so many ways for queers that it’s hardly recognizable, compared to what it was 50 years ago. “So maybe this is the last gasp of that former time, expiring in our presence.” More From This Contributor Julia Peterson (they/them/any) is a nice Jewish queer Canadian journalist based in Martensville, Saskatchewan. When not writing, they can be found out on the running trails or happily buried under a pile of crafting projects. They speak English and French, but sadly not Klingon (yet). hark_a_julia Read More About: Power , Activism , News , Transphobia , Drag , Alberta , Homophobia , Canada Corrections or Feedback? Corrections or Feedback? × Your name * Email * Type of correction or feedback * Factual error in the content Spelling mistake or typo Rights and permissions Feedback Message * Submit Send copy to myself Why you can trust Xtra Keep Reading Politics Pete Hegseth announces gender-affirming care for low-T soldiers Military men over 30 will be screened annually for testosterone levels and can access testosterone replacement therapy to access “maximum psychological and mental readiness” Politics Jamil Jivani’s comments about Pride show how he wants you to hate him The Conservative MP’s culture war posts about Prime Minister Mark Carney’s attendance at Toronto Pride are bait for persecution points Politics The most banned books in Alberta school libraries These titles have been removed from libraries in five or more school divisions this year Politics The Tumbler Ridge shooting is already fuelling anti-trans hate in Canada Bad actors on the right are leaping to connect the shooter’s trans identity to the violence Advertisement Xtra Magazine About us Our principles Inside Xtra Editorial Standards Privacy Policy Terms of Use Contact Us Meet the Team How to pitch to Xtra Advertise Sponsorship Connect Xtra’s newsletters Where to find Xtra Ken Popert Media Fellowship Get Queer podcast Get free Xtra newsletters Xtra is being blocked on Facebook and Instagram for Canadians as part of Meta’s response to Bill C18. Stay connected, and tell a friend. Subscribe Now Ⓒ 1971 - 2026 Pink Triangle Press, All right reserved. XTRA™ is a trademark of Pink Triangle Press. Follow Us: facebook twitter youtube instagram tiktok reddit RSS Connect with the writer × Your Name * Email * Subject Message Communication not private: Your email will be forwarded to the writer by an Xtra editor. Submit Send copy to myself