Human Rights Court Advances Gender Recognition in Latin America, But Challenges Remain - Arcus Foundation Skip to content Arcus Foundation Utility Menu' Apes LGBTQ Search Submit Primary Menu About Grants Learn Connect Media Toggle Flyout Menu Site Wide Search Submit Flyout Menu About Toggle submenu About Arcus Board & Staff Contact Employment Grants Toggle submenu Our Support Apply For A Grant Resources Learn Toggle submenu Publications Blog Annual Reporting Learnings Connect Toggle submenu Social Email Events Media Toggle submenu Press Kit Library Apes LGBTQ Blog Publications Annual Reporting Learnings ©COMCAVIS TRANS / BIANKA RODRIGUEZ Home | Blog Human Rights Court Advances Gender Recognition in Latin America, But Challenges Remain May 28, 2024 Leer en español Major steps forward for legal recognition of gender diversity in parts of Latin America have resulted from recommendations made by the region’s top human rights court seven years ago, but there is still a long way to go in a region affected by complex political contexts, loud and sometimes influential opposition movements, and the rise of an increasingly populist cross-border movement seeking to define gender in exclusively binary terms, according to a report published by the Arcus Foundation in May 2024 . ©RED DE JUVENTUDES TRANS / JESSICA DURAN Activists gather in Mexico City to demand justice for Alessa Flores, a trans woman who was murdered in 2016. Close ©RED DE JUVENTUDES TRANS / JESSICA DURAN An opinion issued in 2017 by the Inter-American Court of Human Rights has led to advances for legal recognition of the identities of transgender and gender nonbinary or nonconforming individuals in the report’s four focus countries: El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Mexico. But in all four countries, a growing and vociferous opposition to any gender identities beyond traditionally masculine or feminine is fomenting violence and discrimination against LGBTQ people, and particularly trans women and men and those who are gender nonconforming, says the report authored by professors Fanny Cata Gómez-Lugo and Michelle Jones Pérez, both of whom are experts on LGBTQ peoples’ rights, and themselves members of the region’s queer and lesbian communities. The report, Progress and Challenges in Legal Gender Identity Recognition , tracks the effects of the court’s Advisory Opinion 24/17 (AO24/17)—an authoritative interpretation of the American Convention on Human Rights, which is binding on signatories, including all four countries in the report—and focuses specifically on measures taken by these countries to comply with the court’s strongly worded mandate that member states ensure easier access for name- and gender-marker changes on official documents. “The court, for the first time, affirmed that States must guarantee peoples’ gender identity, as this is key to the full enjoyment of other human rights,” the report notes, and “…that the rectification of identity documents in accordance with someone’s self-perceived gender identity…constitutes a human right protected by the American Convention.” “ID cards are often needed for daily activities, from opening bank accounts and buying bus tickets to getting a new phonecard,” say the authors, who interviewed 19 trans rights advocates and activists, some of whom work for organizations supported by Arcus and who provided input to the Court on the request for opinion filed by Costa Rica which resulted in AO24/17. “The lack of an ID fuels discrimination and can even incite violence…So progress on correcting these documents is of vital importance to trans people across the Americas.” Nearly two-thirds of Mexico's 31 states plus the Mexico City capital district have passed laws allowing transgender individuals to correct their name and gender marker on official documents. (More details and a map legend are available on page 18 of the report.) Close Mexico Progress was most notable in Mexico, where AO24/17 significantly accelerated and simplified processes for recognition of gender identity; some 20 states and Mexico City now allow trans people to correct their name and gender marker on official documentation, a change which, in most of the states, went into effect within the last five years. Mexico is also the only country of the four that recognizes the gender identity of both trans individuals under 18 years of age (in certain states and local jurisdictions) and of nonbinary people. “Despite all the progress in legal and policy changes, the situation for LGBTQ people in Mexico continues to be dire,” says Gómez-Lugo, noting news reports of five trans women killed and two attacked during the first weeks of 2024: “Serious human rights abuses of LGBTQ people continue as evidenced, among other factors, by the number of people forced to leave due to ongoing violence and seeking asylum in the United States.” Honduras The report also notes some limited but promising developments in Honduras because of AO24/17 and a separate but relevant 2021 ruling by the Inter-American Court on the 2009 killing of trans activist Vicky Hernández. This was followed, in May 2022, by an admission of state culpability for her death by then newly inaugurated President Xiomara Castro, the country’s first female head of state, who committed to creating a legal gender recognition procedure to allow change of gender markers on identity documents. At the time of publication of the report, trans Hondurans were permitted to effect name—but not gender-marker—changes on identity documentation: “It remains to be seen how successful she [President Castro] will be in implementing these reforms and addressing the root causes of violence and discrimination in the country,” says the report, attributing opposition to LGBTQ rights in Honduras in large part to “the strong influence of the Catholic and Evangelical churches in all branches of government.” El Salvador In El Salvador, litigation led in February 2022 to a ruling by the Supreme Court, citing AO24/17, which called on the national assembly to legislate on gender identity recognition. But, against a background of radical changes to institutions of justice and state, and a sweeping clampdown on gang-related violence brought about under the administration of recently re-elected President Nayib Bukele, human rights defenders and organizations have been denounced as anti-government and the deadline for enactment of reforms passed without implementation. ©COMCAVIS TRANS / BIANKA RODRIGUEZ COMCAVIS TRANS executive director Bianka Rodríguez participates in a trans rights demonstration on International Women's Day 2021. Close ©COMCAVIS TRANS / BIANKA RODRIGUEZ “If the legislative assembly of El Salvador is committed to human rights and the rule of law, it should heed the Supreme Court ruling without delay and create a legal gender recognition procedure, which upholds our self-determination, dignity, and freedom,” Bianka Rodríguez, executive director of COMCAVIS TRANS , told Human Rights Watch in February 2023 . “Trans people have been demanding this for years and until such a procedure is created, we will continue to be objects of violence and discrimination.” Due to the lack of compliance with this ruling, COMCAVIS Trans and Synergía - Initiatives for Human Rights —one of the organizations which, on behalf of the Organization of American States' regional LGBTTTI coalition, provided a supportive brief in the process leading to the adoption of AO24/17—filed a petition in January 2023 against El Salvador at the Inter-American Commission. Guatemala Progress has been minimal in Guatemala, where local trans groups conducted several efforts to domesticate AO24/17, but these were thwarted amid a wave of opposition to trans rights and LGBTQ rights in general, says the report. The report also notes that local organizations, such as OTRANS-RN , did succeed in providing support for 400 people to correct their name and photo—but not their sex marker—in identity documents. But obstacles in the official procedure—for example, the US$200 publication of an announcement in local newspapers, a requirement under domestic civil law—make it inaccessible to many: “Trans women come to the capital to get the change done, which is costly and burdensome, but when they go back to their hometowns, the change is challenged by the local authorities. We have documented cases of trans women who have been excluded from voting,” Stacy Velásquez of OTRANS-RN told the report’s authors in a March 2023 interview. ©COLECTIVO TRANS-FORMACIÓN / ALEX CASTILLO Alex Castillo of Trans-Formación, an organization for trans men in Guatemala. Close ©COLECTIVO TRANS-FORMACIÓN / ALEX CASTILLO While the report acknowledges the important advances and the increasing visibility of trans and nonconforming activists and organizations, it also makes several recommendations, including for ongoing advocacy at both regional and national levels, and encourages civil society and donors to consider the complex interplay between gender identity/expression and other forms of discrimination based on ethnicity, race, age, disability, experience in the prison system, and socioeconomic and immigration status. “Progress has been made possible largely because of the work of domestic and regional organizations and activists…and where progress has been limited, activists have played a crucial role in preventing further backsliding,” the report concludes. “Continued support to nongovernmental organizations, activists, and human rights defenders locally and regionally is absolutely key, not just for legal gender recognition but for holding states accountable for their obligation to guarantee and respect human rights for all without discrimination.” Read more blogs featuring voices and stories from the LGBTQ social justice movements we support. Sign up to receive emails from Arcus. And join us on Facebook , Instagram , LinkedIn , and Twitter . Learn more about our Social Justice Program . Back to top Related Posts Report Finds NGO Advocacy Positively Affects LGBT Protections An Arcus-commissioned study confirms that countries rarely succeed in establishing protections for LGBT people without the existence and visibility of LGBT advocacy organizations. More ©CARL COLLISON A Q&A on the Midpoint Evaluation of Arcus’ Social Justice Program Strategy Arcus Social Justice Program vice president Alli Jernow discusses a recent major evaluation of the program's strategy and the changes that stem from it. More ©CHRISTIAN GUTIÉRREZ MARTÍNEZ Towards Trans Liberation: A Toolkit for Human Rights Defenders Advocating for Legal Gender Recognition ILGA World has released a toolkit to support trans human rights defenders in their advocacy work toward legal gender recognition. More ©Shalaka Pai for ILGA World Arcus Foundation Push Boundaries Make Change Phone Numbers U.S. Office Phone: +1-212-488-3000 U.K. Office Phone: +44-1223-653040 Emails Subscribe Connect with us on Social Media Social Justice Program Facebook Instagram LinkedIn YouTube Great Apes & Gibbons Program Facebook Instagram LinkedIn YouTube © 2025 Arcus Foundation Privacy Policy Terms & Conditions Andrew R. Halloran Andrew R. Halloran est primatologue, conservationniste et spécialiste du bien-être animal. Cela fait plus de 25 ans qu’il travaille avec les chimpanzés dans des refuges, dans des zoos et en pleine nature. A.R. Halloran a fondé et dirige The Elgin Centre , une organisation à but non lucratif dont la finalité est d’améliorer la vie des animaux captifs. Ce centre coopère avec des zoos et des refuges. Il fournit des consultations spécialisées en vue de concevoir des stratégies de soin au meilleur coût, des programmes d’enrichissement et des protocoles de sécurité qui garantissent l’épanouissement des animaux tout en répondant aux besoins des institutions. Par ailleurs, il a cofondé le Tonkolili Chimpanzee Project en Sierra Leone. Il s’agit d’une initiative communautaire autour de la rivière Pampana. Ce projet atténue les conflits entre humains et chimpanzés dans les paysages anthropiques au moyen de la promotion de l’agriculture durable et d’incitations économiques, ce qui réduit le nombre de chimpanzés tués, et encourage la coexistence à travers l’éducation et la préservation des habitats. A.R. Halloran est l’auteur des livres suivants : Song of the Ape (2012, St. Martin’s Press), Lion Shaped Mountain (2021, Earth Island Journal), et Animal Curation: The Science of Care & Welfare (2025, Cambridge University Press). Par son travail au sein de The Elgin Centre et du Tonkolili Project , A.R. Halloran concilie captivité et conservation, et défend des pratiques éthiques qui promeuvent une vie épanouie pour les chimpanzés et les autres animaux L’espoir d’A.R. Halloran, en écrivant ce texte, est que le partage d’histoires sur les refuges pour chimpanzés lui permettra de mettre en lumière leur qualité d’individus à part entière et d’illustrer les complexités scientifiques à l’œuvre lorsqu’il s’agit de fournir de bonnes conditions de vie à cette espèce extraordinaire. X Andrew R. Halloran, Ph.D. Andrew R. Halloran, Ph.D., is a primatologist, conservationist, and animal welfare specialist with over 25 years of experience working with chimpanzees in sanctuaries, zoos, and the wild. Halloran founded and directs The Elgin Centre, a nonprofit organization dedicated to improving the lives of captive animals. The Centre collaborates with zoos and sanctuaries, offering expert consultations to develop cost-effective care strategies, enrichment programs, and safety protocols that ensure animals thrive while meeting institutional needs. Additionally, he co-founded the Tonkolili Chimpanzee Project in Sierra Leone, a community-based initiative along the Pampana River. The project mitigates human-chimpanzee conflicts in anthropogenic landscapes by promoting sustainable agriculture and economic incentives, reducing chimpanzee killings, and fostering coexistence through education and habitat preservation. Halloran has authored the books Song of the Ape (2012, St. Martin’s Press), Lion Shaped Mountain (2021, Earth Island Journal), and Animal Curation: The Science of Care & Welfare (2025, Cambridge University Press). Through his work with The Elgin Centre and the Tonkolili Project, Halloran bridges captivity and conservation, advocating for ethical practices that promote a life of thriving for chimpanzees and other animals. In writing this piece, Halloran hopes that by sharing the stories of chimpanzee sanctuaries, he can highlight them as the individuals they are, as well as showcasing the complexities of the science of providing good welfare to such an extraordinary species. X Get to Know a Muxe Artist and Activist ©MEXFAM A muxe woman, Peregrina Vera is a member of the Indigenous Zapotec community from the town of Juchitán in the southeast of Oaxaca state in Mexico. A skilled artisan of traditional woven clothing, Peregrina also prepares decorations for local festivals. But in addition to her artistic endeavors, she is one of the leaders of the Transformándome (“Transforming Myself”) project housed at Mexfam, a nationwide civil society organization promoting access to health, education, and advocacy of sexual and reproductive rights. The project helps educate the muxe about their rights and how they can live authentically as themselves, including acquiring identification documents that accurately portray their names and genders. Peregrina’s activism includes documenting incidents of hate crimes against the muxe throughout the region. This is a subject she unfortunately knows all too well after she experienced a recent violent attack and robbery in which all of her work tools were stolen. These incidents have increased as new people have moved into the region. “Before they did nothing to us,” Peregrina explains. “Now if you’re at a party, just by seeing you, they want to attack you, they insult you, and on many occasions, the aggression changes from words to physical attacks.” By documenting these incidents, Peregrina is helping to bring the issue of hate violence to the attention of authorities and the public. She is also working to connect members of her community through online meetings using computers acquired by the Transformándome project. All of her activism is aimed at increasing the acceptance and inclusion of her muxe community. X Una líder Muxe comparte su historia ©MEXFAM Mujer Muxe, Peregrina Vera es miembro de la comunidad indígena Zapoteca del pueblo de Juchitán, en el sureste del estado de Oaxaca. Hábil artesana de la ropa tejida tradicional, Peregrina también prepara adornos para las fiestas locales. Pero además de sus esfuerzos artísticos, es una de las líderes de Transformándome en Mexfam, la organización nacional de planificación familiar de México. El proyecto ayuda a educar a la comunidad Muxe sobre sus derechos y sobre cómo pueden vivir auténticamente sin esconderse, incluyendo cómo obtener documentos de identidad que reflejen con exactitud sus nombres y géneros. El activismo de Peregrina incluye la documentación de incidentes de crímenes de odio contra la comunidad Muxe en toda la región. Se trata de un tema que, por desgracia, conoce demasiado bien tras haber sufrido recientemente un ataque violento y un robo en el que le sustrajeron todas sus herramientas de trabajo. Estos incidentes han aumentado a medida que nuevas personas se han trasladado a la región. “Antes no nos hacían nada”, explica. “Ahora, si estás en una fiesta, solo con verte quieren agredirte, te insultan y, en muchas ocasiones, la agresión pasa de las palabras a los ataques físicos”. Con la documentación de estos incidentes, Peregrina está ayudando a llamar la atención de las autoridades y del público sobre el problema de la violencia motivada por el odio. También está trabajando para conectar a los miembros de su comunidad a través de reuniones en línea utilizando computadoras adquiridas gracias al proyecto Transformándome. Todo su activismo busca aumentar la aceptación y la inclusión de su comunidad Muxe. X X Sign up for Arcus emails × Arcus homepage marquee video transcript A bonobo in trees moving its mouth, with a binocular effect zooming in on the ape. A text overlay says, “Dedicated to the idea that people can live in harmony with one another and the natural world.” A forest with the sun shining through trees, with a text overlay that quotes Jon Stryker and Annette Lanjouw of Arcus Foundation saying, “Destruction of nature exposes us to a panoply of diseases, and creates and exacerbates social injustice and political repression around the world.” A razed forest. A Learn More button that links to the Arcus Foundation 2019 Annual Report A city street with a large crosswalk and a large crowd of people crossing it. Text overlay with a quote: “LGBTQ communities served by our Social Justice Program live at the intersection of this long chain of degradation—environmental and social.” A scene from a protest, people wearing face masks, waving signs and banners, drumming on a drum, dancing, shouting through a megaphone. Two signs are a sheer black color with gold trim and list several names, including Roxsana Hernandez, Claire Legato, Muhlaysia Booker, and Nina Pop. Another sign says “Black Trans Lives Matter”. A Learn More button that links to the Arcus Foundation’s support page for LGBT Social Justice. A woman wearing a white dress, long wavy dark brown hair, teal lipstick, plum fingernails, rectangular metal glasses sits in a chair and talks. A text overlay identifies her as Úmi Vera, Familia: Trans Queer Liberation Movement, United States, and quotes her saying: “There’s incredible power in the trans queer migrant community. To be dehumanized so much and not lose your hope, your sense of joy—it’s just astonishing.” A Learn More button that links to a story: LGBTQ Migrants to the U.S. Fight to Stay Safe A person with shoulder-length, dark brown, straight hair wearing a pink and silver fuzzy tiara and a white and purple dress with a big tulle bottom and a corset top, over a white t-shirt that says SELENA, dancing around in circles outdoors with a crowd of people sitting and standing nearby, and with the flags of Puerto Rico, Panama, and Peru hanging from wood beams in the background. A woman with short black and gray hair wearing a black dress shirt talks. A text overlay identifies her as Indyra Mendoza, Red Lésbica Cattrachas, Honduras, and quotes her saying: “For so many years, we missed being free and open with our partners—now is the time to make it happen!.” A Learn More button that links to a story: “I Know Who I Am, But My Country Doesn’t Recognize Me” . A woman wearing a long-sleeved gray shirt under a jumper featuring white and pastel yellow, blue and green circles, a black head covering and a red face mask, stands in front of a church building with a sign that says: “Central Methodist Mission You are born in love by love for love”. A text overlay identifies her as Mia Lukas, SistaazHood, homeless trans women supported by Gender DynamiX, South Africa, and quotes her saying: “With their support, we feel more included in society.” A Learn More button that links to a story: Supporting Cape Town’s Homeless Transgender Women During COVID-19 A map of the world with parts of the following regions emphasized: The United States, Mexico, the Caribbean, South America, Central America, East Africa, Southern Africa, and Asia. A text overlay that says “Arcus Foundation grantees work in 29 countries around the world, affecting millions of lives in Africa, Asia, and the Americas.” An aerial view of a forest with area of deforested land. A text overlay that quotes Fransisca Ariantiningsih, Orangutan Information Centre, Indonesia, saying “Logging and habitat destruction force animals from the forest, making them vulnerable to trafficking.” A woman with neck-length dark brown straight hair and a beige dress shirt talks in front of a pink flowering tree. A Learn More button that links to the homepage of the State of the Apes publication A baby orangutan slowly climbs a tree. A text overlay with a quote saying “The orangutan is Indonesia’s national treasure. It takes years to rehabilitate each individual.” An adult orangutan eats tree bark while clinging to a tree. A text overlay with a quote saying “Our ecosystem is shared between humans and wildlife. If one single thing is gone, it affects all.” A Learn More button that links to the Arcus Foundation’s support page for Great Apes and Gibbons Conservation . An adult gibbon with black fur climbs a tree with a baby gibbon clinging onto the adult. Two bonobos move through trees. A man with a beard and buzzed hair wearing a tan polo shirt with the African Wildlife Foundation logo talks. A text overlay identifies him as Raoul Mulumba Tafua, African Wildlife Foundation, Democratic Republic of the Congo, and quotes him saying, “Protecting Congo’s forest biodiversity benefits the community from the perspective of climate change, food production, and tourism.” A woman with tightly braided dark brown hair and wearing a t-shirt with pink sleeves, a pink bow, and the faces of two people against a light blue background, talks. A text overlay identifies her as Merveille Boale Batuli, supported by Village Enterprise and African Wildlife Foundation, and quotes her saying “I’m a mother, a widow, and I have to feed my family.” A man in a gray dress shirt and wearing a shoulder bag sits behind a table and reaches toward prescription medicine boxes and opens one to take out a smaller box and hand it to someone on the other end of the table. A text overlay quotes Jon Stryker and Annette Lanjouw of Arcus Foundation saying “Conservation without social justice is neither ethical nor possible. To achieve conservation and respect for the world’s apes, we work with the people who live alongside them.” A Learn More button that links to the Arcus Foundation’s Annual Reporting page. The man from the pharmacy walks down a dirt path past bushes while smiling. Text comes up on the screen saying “Push boundaries. Make change.” Logos for Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, and LinkedIn appear on the screen. A button that links to the Credits for this video. × ×