Ghana anti-LGBT bill: Supreme Court dismisses legal challenges Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Home News US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business World of Business Technology of Business NYSE Opening Bell Technology Artificial Intelligence Intelligence Revolution AI v the Mind Tech Now Health Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList To the Ends of the Earth Earth Science Natural Wonders Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcast Categories Radio Audio FAQs Video BBC Maestro Discover the World Live Live News Live Sport Site search Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters Ghana's Supreme Court dismisses challenges to anti-LGBT bill 18 December 2024 Share Save Add as preferred on Google Komla Adom in Accra & Danai Nesta Kupemba in London BBC News AFP Gay sex is already punishable by up to three years in prison Ghana's Supreme Court has unanimously decided to dismiss two legal challenges to new anti-LGBT legislation that has been criticised by rights groups. Earlier this year, lawmakers passed a bill imposing three years in prison for people identifying as LGBT and five years for forming or funding LGBT groups. Fear and uncertainty has gripped Ghana's LGBT community, already facing limited rights. The bill, considered one of Africa's most draconian anti-LGBT laws, has been condemned by the UN. Amanda Odoi and Richard Dela-Sky filed separate challenges to the bill to declare it illegal and prevent President Nana Akufo-Addo from signing it into law. President Akufo-Addo delayed signing it following the challenges to the bill. He said he would wait for the Supreme Court's decision. But after several months of consideration, the judges said the case couldn't be reviewed until the president had signed it into law. "Until there's presidential assent, there is no act," said Justice Avril Lovelace-Johnson as quoted by Reuters news agency. The two cases were "unanimously dismissed", Justice Lovelace-Johnson added. Ms Odoi and Mr Sky's lawyers told Reuters they weren't happy with the ruling and would explore their options after reviewing the full judgment. Ghana's LGBT terror: 'We live in fear of snitches' Being gay in Ghana: LGBT community is 'under attack' The proposed new legislation - The Proper Human Sexual Rights and Ghanaian Family Values bill - was backed by both of Ghana's main political parties. But Mr Sky said there were not enough MPs in the chamber when the vote took place. AFP Ghanaians in London protested against the bill when it was passed With his two-term presidency ending on 7 January, President Akufo-Addo has not yet revealed what he will do. Opposition leader John Mahama, who won this month's presidential election , has expressed support for the bill. If it becomes law, it is likely to face further challenges in court. Gay sex is already punishable by up to three years in prison in the conservative West African country. But this new legislation has already had implications for the LGBT community, said Abena Takyiwaa Manuh, senior fellow of Accra-based Centre for Democratic Governance. "Even without the passage of the bill, people have been attacking members of a certain community," he was quoted as saying by Reuters. "This kind of formalism actually put at risk the life and health of certain members of the community, and of course some of us who are human rights defenders." The bill was first introduced to parliament in 2021 but faced many delays. When it was passed, the controversial bill sparked criticism from the finance ministry, which warned that Ghana could lose about $3.8bn (£3bn) in World Bank funding over the next five to six years if it was passed. You may also be interested in: Why are different African countries passing anti-LGBT laws? Ghana IMF loan: Will $3bn solve the economic crisis? Ghana Cardinal Peter Turkson: It's time to understand homosexuality Getty Images/BBC Go to BBCAfrica.com for more news from the African continent. Follow us on Twitter @BBCAfrica , on Facebook at BBC Africa or on Instagram at bbcafrica BBC Africa podcasts Africa Daily Focus on Africa LGBT rights in Africa Ghana LGBT Africa Related Ghana's anti-LGBTQ+ bill to be scrutinised before approval, president says Ghana's parliament passes anti-LGBTQ+ bill Senegal president signs tough new anti-LGBT law doubling jail terms More from the BBC 7 hrs ago Two mass shootings in South Africa leave 27 dead The two attacks hours apart come as the country struggles to stop high levels of gang-related armed violence. 7 hrs ago 9 hrs ago Theft of church Pride banner reported as hate crime The vicar of St Mark's Church in Sheffield says it is not the first time such items have been taken. 9 hrs ago 1 day ago Rainbow flag wrapped around castle for Pride event Totnes Castle is wrapped in a rainbow flag as part of the Devon town's Pride celebrations. 1 day ago 1 day ago Senedd presiding officer accuses Reform MS of offensive comments in Welsh Gender Service debate Joe Martin called for "butcher" doctors who performed surgery on children to be jailed. 1 day ago 2 days ago 'More will turn up' - Work by Scottish artists unearthed for homecoming exhibition Robert Colquhoun and Robert MacBryde were among the most celebrated figures in British art. 2 days ago British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages The BBC is in multiple languages Read the BBC In your own language BBC News Brasil BBC News Mundo (Spanish) BBC News မြန်မာ (Burmese) BBC News 中文 (Chinese) BBC News Indonesia BBC News 코리아 (Korean) BBC News ไทย (Thai) BBC News Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese) BBC News Azərbaycanca (Azeri) BBC News Magyarul (Hungarian) BBC News Кыргыз Кызматы (Kyrgyz) BBC News Polska (Polish) BBC News România (Romanian) BBC News Русская служба (Russian) BBC News na srpskom (Serbian) BBC News Україна (Ukrainian) BBC News O'zbek (Uzbek) BBC News عربي (Arabic) BBC News فارسی (Persian) BBC News Türkçe (Turkish) BBC News বাংলা (Bengali) BBC News دری (Dari) BBC News ગુજરાતી (Gujarati) BBC News हिन्दी (Hindi) BBC News मराठी (Marathi) BBC News नेपाली (Nepali) BBC News සිංහල (Sinhala) BBC News ਪੰਜਾਬੀ (Punjabi) BBC News Afaan Oromoo BBC News አማርኛ (Amharic) BBC News Afrique (French) BBC News Hausa BBC News Gaelic NAIDHEACHDAN BBC News Ìgbò BBC News Japanese 日本語 BBC News Gahuza BBC News Pidgin BBC News Somali BBC News Swahili BBC News தமிழ் (Tamil) BBC News తెలుగు (Telugu) BBC News ትግርኛ (Tigrinya) BBC News اردو (Urdu) BBC News Yorùbá BBC News World Service Follow BBC on: Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Do not share or sell my info Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us BBC.com Help & FAQs Content Index Set Preferred Source Copyright 2026 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.