Kosovo | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Kosovo At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Legal Gender Recognition Possible? Yes LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? Yes Last Update: March 12, 2026 Kosovo has established some progressive legal protections for LGBTIQ people on paper, yet implementation remains inconsistent, and political will is often lacking. It is one of the few countries that constitutionally bans discrimination based on sexual orientation (Article 24). The 2015 Law on Protection from Discrimination further covers gender identity. Legal gender recognition is possible but bureaucratically burdensome. While administrative bodies have historically demanded surgery, landmark court rulings (such as the Blert Morina case) have affirmed that requiring medical interventions is unconstitutional. Nevertheless, a clear, self-determination-based legislative procedure is still absent, forcing many to resort to litigation. Family rights remain a contentious battlefield. While the constitution defines marriage neutrally, the Family Law restricts it to different-sex couples. Despite Prime Minister Albin Kurti’s announcement in April 2024 that his government would legalize same-sex civil unions, the initiative has stalled. As of February 2026, the Parliament has failed to adopt the new Civil Code due to fierce opposition, including from within the ruling party. Existing legal guarantees have thus far failed to change public perceptions , with social acceptance remaining very low. The political climate in 2024–2025 saw a rise in hostile rhetoric. During the 2025 election period, several political parties used discriminatory and denigrating language about LGBTIQ people in campaigns, and issues important to sexual and gender minorities were largely sidelined. The Election Complaints and Appeals Panel (ECAP) fined the “Coalition for Families” for using hate speech against the people of queer experience. Institutional violence also surfaced: in August 2025, five police officers were suspended for physically abusing and humiliating a queer person in custody. Despite threats, activism persists. The 2025 Pride Parade in Pristina, held under the slogan “ No Step Back ,” concluded without major violence but required heavy police protection. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International