Skip to cookie privacy notice
Skip to main content
العربية
简中
繁中
English
Français
Deutsch
日本語
Português
Русский
Español
More languages
Search
Donate Now
Close
Search
Search
Primary navigation
Countries
Africa
All Africa
African Union
Angola
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Côte d'Ivoire
Democratic Republic of Congo
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Eswatini (formerly Swaziland)
Ethiopia
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Kenya
Liberia
Malawi
Mali
Mauritius
Mozambique
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
South Sudan
Sudan
Tanzania
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe
Americas
All Americas
Argentina
Bolivia
Brazil
Canada
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Guatemala
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Mexico
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Uruguay
Venezuela
Asia
All Asia
Afghanistan
Australia
Bangladesh
Bhutan
Brunei
Cambodia
China and Tibet
Fiji
India
Indonesia
Japan
Laos
Malaysia
Maldives
Myanmar (Burma)
Nauru
Nepal
North Korea
Pakistan
Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Singapore
South Korea
Sri Lanka
Taiwan
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Vietnam
Europe/Central Asia
All Europe/Central Asia
Albania
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Belarus
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Bulgaria
Croatia
Czech Republic
Denmark
European Union
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Holy See
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Kazakhstan
Kyrgyzstan
Latvia
Lithuania
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Russia
Serbia/Kosovo
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Tajikistan
Türkiye
Turkmenistan
Ukraine
United Kingdom
Uzbekistan
Middle East/North Africa
All Middle East/North Africa
Algeria
Bahrain
Egypt
Iran
Iraq
Israel/Palestine
Jordan
Kuwait
Lebanon
Libya
Mauritania
Morocco/Western Sahara
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Syria
Tunisia
United Arab Emirates
Yemen
United States
All United States
Criminal Justice
Democracy
Economic Justice
Immigrants’ Rights and Border Policy
Racial Justice
US Foreign Policy
Topics
Arms
Cluster Munitions
Killer Robots
Landmines
Explosive Weapons in Populated Areas
Incendiary Weapons
Children's Rights
Education
Attacks on Education
Children Separated from Families
Children and Armed Conflict
Child Labor
Youth Justice
Migrant and Refugee Children
Intersex Children
Crisis and Conflict
Disability Rights
Shackling
Economic Justice and Rights
Corporate Accountability
Poverty and Inequality
Environment and Human Rights
Climate Change
Deforestation
Fossil Fuels
Free Speech
Press Freedom
Religious Freedom
Health
Sexual and Reproductive Health
Detention Centers
Disasters and Displaced Populations
Environment and Health
Health Care Access
HIV/AIDS and Tuberculosis
Palliative Care
Attacks on Health
LGBT Rights
Refugees and Migrants
Asylum Seekers
Internally Displaced People
Exploitation, Forced Labor & Trafficking
Rights of Older People
International Justice
International Criminal Court
Peace and Justice
Sport and Human Rights
Technology and Rights
Digital Investigations Lab
Terrorism / Counterterrorism
CIA Activities
Detention without Trial
Edward Snowden
Guantanamo
Guantanamo - Military Commissions
Targeted Killings and Drones
Torture
United Nations
Human Rights Council
Women's Rights
Forced Marriage
Gender Based Violence
Domestic Workers
Gender Equality
Reproductive Rights
Sexual Violence
Labor Rights
Sex Work
Women and Armed Conflict
Women’s Health
Reports
Video & Photos
Impact
Join Us
Newsletters
Our Committees
Film Festival
Legacies for Justice
About
About Us
History
Newsletters
Careers
People
Board of Directors
Advisory Committees
Social Media
Human Rights Education
Partners
Partner Resources
Financials and Fundraising Policy
Accessibility
Contact
Give Now
Make a One-time Gift
Give Monthly
Gifts in Wills and Trusts
Matching Gifts
Partners for Justice
Stock or Wire Transfer
Give from Your IRA
Donate Now
Search
Search
English
Choose your language
Close
العربية
简中
繁中
English
Français
Deutsch
日本語
Português
Русский
Español
More Languages
Donate Now
Open the main menu
Trending
Russia-Ukraine War
Israel/Palestine
Trump Administration and Human Rights
Crisis in the Middle East
International Criminal Court
Would you like to see a version of this page that loads faster by showing text only?
Yes
No, don't ask again
✕ Close
“The Deceased Can’t Speak for Herself:” Violence Against LGBT People in Malaysia
Print
Donate Now
June 25, 2019 12:47PM EDT
|
Commentary
“The Deceased Can’t Speak for Herself:” Violence Against LGBT People in Malaysia
Published in:
Georgetown Journal of International Affairs, Co-written with Thilaga Sulathireh*
Share this via Facebook
Share this via Bluesky
Share this via X
Share this via WhatsApp
Share this via Email
More sharing options
Share this via LinkedIn
Share this via Reddit
Share this via Telegram
Share this via Printer
The New Year rang in little cheer for transgender women in Malaysia. On January 1, a trans woman was killed in Klang, a Kuala Lumpur suburb, the third such killing in Malaysia in fewer than two months. Her death remains under police investigation. Like so many trans women in Malaysia excluded from the formal employment sector, this woman was a sex worker. She died falling—or was possibly thrown—from a moving vehicle. The driver, presumably her client, was arrested in connection with the death. He told police she jumped from the car after stealing his mobile phone. Trans sex workers in Klang, however, are convinced she was murdered.
Just three weeks earlier, also in Klang, another trans sex worker was beaten to death. While police have opened investigations into both cases, they hastily determined that the killings were not hate crimes. Rights advocates are skeptical, but as one trans activist put it, “the deceased can’t speak for herself.”
Lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) people in Malaysia face violence from both state authorities and civilian actors. In September 2018, a Sharia court sentenced two women to caning for purportedly attempting to engage in homosexual relations. State religious officials and police officers have also physically and sexually assaulted transgender women arrested during raids to enforce Sharia laws that prohibit “a male posing as a female.”
Several Malaysian trans women have reported abusive arrests have diminished since an appeals court struck down as unconstitutional a state “cross-dressing” law in 2014. Malaysia’s highest court overturned the ruling on a technicality, but trans women say advocacy and awareness-raising have restrained officials. Now, trans women primarily fear violence from ordinary people: clients, partners, or strangers, including vigilante groups seeking to rid the streets of trans women. But even when state agents are not the culprits of violence, they bear responsibility for propagating discriminatory beliefs that may lead to hate crimes and for failing to denounce violence when it takes place.
Malaysia held a historic election in May 2018, in which the United Malay National Organization (UMNO) party, in power since independence in 1957, was massively defeated. Fed up with abuses of power, voters cast their ballots for change. The new coalition government, led by the Pakatan Harapan party, has delivered to a certain extent, dropping politically motivated charges against many activists and investigating corrupt officials. Yet, it has pointedly refused to embrace LGBT equality. Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad has described “LGBT” as among “ things we cannot accept ,” while Pakatan Harapan leader Anwar Ibrahim has called for mobilization against “LGBT tendencies and their ideas.” Furthermore, the deputy home minister has condemned LGBT “culture,” and religious affairs minister Mujahid Yusof Rawa has promoted the scientifically discredited idea that LGBT people should and could “change” their sexual orientation or gender identity and return to the “right path.”
Malaysia’s federal penal code, which dates back to British colonialism, punishes “carnal knowledge against the order of nature” with up to twenty years in prison. The country’s thirteen states and federal territories each have their own Sharia criminal enactment, applicable to Muslims. Almost all such state laws prohibit same-sex relations. They also prohibit “posing” as someone of a different sex, making Malaysia one of the few countries in the world that locks people up simply for being transgender.
When religious authorities in Terengganu state, which is run by the opposition Malaysia Islamic Party (PAS), caned two women for lesbian acts, some ruling party officials voiced objections regarding the nature of the punishment, and PH leader Anwar Ibrahim suggested that same-sex relations should be decriminalized . Anwar should know: as the most famous casualty of Malaysia’s “unnatural offenses” law, he was twice imprisoned between 1999 and 2018 on politically-motivated sodomy charges. However, his party has taken no steps toward decriminalizing sodomy, nor toward persuading states to repeal anti-LGBT provisions in their Sharia enactments.
Instead, the current administration continues its predecessor’s anti-LGBT policies, focusing on “rehabilitation” and prohibition of so-called “ promotion of LGBT culture ” (any form of LGBT visibility), while maintaining the threat of sanction through state and federal laws. The ethnically and religiously diverse Pakatan Harapan coalition appears determined to legitimize its Islamic credentials to bolster support among Malay Muslims, many of whom voted in favor of the long-ruling UMNO party or Islamist opposition parties in 2018. This battle for the Malay heartland, presumed to be socially and religiously conservative, causes politicians from across the political spectrum to emphatically adopt anti-LGBT positions. Activists argue that Pakatan Harapan’s unwillingness to ally itself with LGBT people’s struggle for equal rights and its silence in the face of hate crimes renders it complicit in those crimes, and that jockeying by politicians to avoid being seen as pro-LGBT fuels hate. One clear battleground is online. Multiple LGBT people and rights activists have reported a spike in anti-LGBT hate speech on the Internet since the elections. In August, one trans-led group filed a police complaint about social media posts promoting anti-LGBT violence. Six months later, they had still not received a response
In this context, when eight men in Seremban assaulted a trans woman known as Suki in August 2018, beating her so severely that doctors had to remove her spleen, police who interviewed her in the hospital asked her why she thought she had been attacked. She responded with outrage: “They’re in the police station. Shouldn’t you be asking them instead of me?” In December, attackers pulled two men from a car in Kuala Lumpur and beat them for allegedly engaging in same-sex intimacy, then circulated a video of the assault on social media.
Police have made arrests in some of the recent hate-crimes cases. Two killings from 2017—one of a trans woman named Sameera Krishnan, stabbed and shot to death in Kuantan, and another of 18-year-old student T. Nhaveen in Penang, beaten to death by high school classmates who had bullied him for being “effeminate”—have resulted in ongoing prosecutions. Yet, when police refuse to acknowledge that acts of violence might be bias-motivated crimes, as they have with the killings of trans women in Klang, and when the authorities fail to condemn attacks, LGBT people are left feeling that the state does not support them. Even if perpetrators are brought to justice, a strictly punitive approach without a prevention strategy or meaningful change in political leaders’ approach to LGBT rights are all unlikely to stem the violence. A punitive approach also raises its own human rights concerns; a murder conviction, for instance, carries the death penalty in Malaysia. Many of the alleged assailants in these cases are young people who have been molded by societal and state-sponsored homophobia and transphobia. As long as authorities shut down positive portrayals of LGBT people while promoting a harmful “change” narrative, school textbooks portray LGBT people as deviant, and Malaysian law considers them criminals, impressionable young Malaysians may choose to take the law into their own hands.
Pakatan Harapan’s campaign manifesto promised to “make [Malaysia’s] human rights record respected by the world.” Malaysia must prioritize the right to life and the right to be free from violence—rights which currently elude many LGBT people. If Malaysia’s government wishes to address anti-LGBT violence, it must condemn the attacks and recognize that many of them are hate crimes. It should roll out a multi-pronged prevention plan, to include promoting public discussion of LGBT rights, removing harmful stereotypes from textbooks, discontinuing anti-LGBT state programs, and initiating legal reforms to advance LGBT equality. The police should undergo training in recognizing and investigating anti-LGBT hate crimes. Denial may be politically expedient, but lives are at stake. The deceased demand to be heard.
* Thilaga Sulathireh is with Justice for Sisters, an advocacy group working on human rights of trans and LGBTIQ+ persons in Malaysia.
Your tax deductible gift can help stop human rights violations and save lives around the world.
$50
$100
$250
$500
$1000
Other
$
Donate Now
Region / Country
Asia Malaysia
Topic
LGBT Rights
More Reading
March 14, 2019
News Release
Malaysia: Drop Investigation of Women’s March Organizers
August 28, 2018
Dispatches
Caning for Alleged Lesbian Acts in Malaysia Postponed
Reports
February 15, 2024
Report
“We Have to Beg So Many People”
Human Rights Violations in Nepal’s Legal Gender Recognition Practices
August 10, 2022
Report
“I Don’t Want to Change Myself”
Anti-LGBT Conversion Practices, Discrimination, and Violence in Malaysia
More Reading
March 14, 2019
News Release
Malaysia: Drop Investigation of Women’s March Organizers
August 28, 2018
Dispatches
Caning for Alleged Lesbian Acts in Malaysia Postponed
Most Viewed
March 31, 2022
News Release
Iran: Women Blocked From Entering Stadium
June 14, 2018
News Release
Africa: Pregnant Girls, Young Mothers Barred from School
September 8, 2016
News Release
Nepal: Child Marriage Threatens Girls’ Futures
September 25, 2026
News Release
Ethiopia: Indiscriminate Airstrike in Tigray
May 17, 2021
Report
“Years Don’t Wait for Them”
Share this via Facebook
Share this via Bluesky
Share this via X
Share this via WhatsApp
Share this via Email
More sharing options
Share this via LinkedIn
Share this via Reddit
Share this via Telegram
Share this via Printer
Protecting Rights, Saving Lives
Human Rights Watch defends the rights of people in close to 100 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justice
Donate Now
Get updates on human rights issues from around the globe. Join our movement today.
Enter an email address
Leave blank
Leave blank
Leave blank
Processing..
Thank you for signing up!
An error occurred while subscribing your email address. Please try again.
Get Updates On Rights Issues Worldwide
Leave blank
Leave blank
Leave blank
Sign Up
Connect With Us
BlueSky
X
Facebook
YouTube
Instagram
LinkedIn
TikTok
Footer menu
Contact Us
Corrections
Privacy Policy
Permissions
Site Map
Child Safeguarding
Text Version
© 2026 Human Rights Watch
Human Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700
Human Rights Watch is a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808