Challenge to Dominica's buggery laws filed in Dominica High Court - Dominica News Online Skip to content Home Categories Historical News Announcements Death Announcements General Announcements Columns Alive Word CariMAN Dear Bella Ghost Stories Health Talk Just Dennis Natural Healing Stay Well & Sparkle! Features Business In Focus Check This Out Commentary Combatting COVID-19 Letters to the Editor Featured Photo Poetry Corner Business Directory Classifieds Contact Us News Links Factually Speaking DNO, your only source for news that is iit - I ndependent. I mmediate. T rusted. Home >> Crime/Court/Law Challenge to Dominica’s buggery laws filed in Dominica High Court Dominica News Online - Saturday, July 20th, 2019 at 3:01 PM Share Tweet Share Pin Founder of MiRiDom, Daryl Phillip at news conference A case challenging the country’s law which criminalizes buggery and other sexual activity between consenting partners, including and in particular, partners of the same sex, has been filed in the High Court of Justice in Dominica. The gay man who brought the action is claiming that the law violates “numerous rights guaranteed in the Constitution of Dominica.” Senior Policy Analyst and Legal Advisor in the Canadian HIV/AIDS Legal Network, Maurice Tomlinson made the announcement during a news conference in Roseau on Friday, July 19, 2019. The case was filed on the same day. The claimant, whose name and identity were not disclosed, is being represented by Attorney Cara Shillingford and supported financially by groups and advocates both in Dominica and elsewhere, including Minority Rights Dominica, the Canadian HIV/AIDS Legal Network, the University of Toronto’s International Human Rights Program and Lawyers Without Borders. Founder and coordinator of Minority Rights Dominica (MiRiDom), Daryl Phillip said this is an important day for the group. “To us this is an important day. The case that we have been working on for the last 4 and a half to 5 years is being launched; it is being registered in the courts of Dominica,” he said. He said the challenge targets section 14 and section 16 of the Sexual Offenses Act of Dominica. “These are the ones that deal with buggery and gross indecency,” Phillip said. Section 14 is a sweeping law criminalizing gross indecency which is defined as any act (other than penile-vaginal sex) by anyone “involving the use of the genital organs, breast or anus for the purpose of arousing or gratifying sexual desire.” The maximum penalty is 12 years in prison (if the act is committed with a person aged 16 or older), while section 16 of the Act criminalizes buggery, which the Act defines as anal sex between two men or between a man and a woman. The maximum penalty is 10 years imprisonment plus the possibility of forced psychiatric confinement. According to Phillip, after years of consultation with various professionals around the world including the United Nations (UN) and the legal authorities within the Caribbean, “ We think we have a case to bring forward and we are bringing the case forward to the courts of Dominica because we think that affects everyone, even those who feel that they are not a part of the system but somewhere along the line your family, your friends, your brothers, your sisters, your acquaintances will be affected by that law and you will feel that you have not done right by them. So, we are trying to do right to have a more equal society.” Meantime, the Dominican who brought the case forward, said through a statement, that he fears for himself and for others who are part of the Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender (LGBT) community in Dominica. He explained that throughout his life in Dominica, he has endured discrimination, threats, harassment and violence because of his sexual orientation. “The perpetrators of such acts find a sense of comfort and safety in the laws that criminalize buggery and gross indecency,” the claimant said in the statement. “These laws mean that we live with the threat of criminal sanction for engaging in consensual sexual activity, but their effects extend far beyond this direct path.” He continued, “These laws are not only discriminatory themselves, but they incite and encourage hateful and violent conduct towards LGBT individuals. The laws also condone police discrimination and inaction against such acts of harassment and violence.” The gay man states that he is also challenging section 14 and 16 of the Sexual Offences Act, “because these laws not only directly violate various constitutional rights but also incite many other violations I and other LGBT Dominicans experience.” He believes that the Act must be changed to ensure that all Dominicans feel welcome and comfortable in their own country and argues that the repeal of sections 14 and 16 of the Sexual Offences Act “is a necessary step to ensuring the human rights of Dominica’s LGBT community, ostensibly guaranteed under our Constitution, are protected.” He said he hopes to see a future where younger generations are free to be who they are without worrying when they will be harassed next. “I want to live in a Dominica where I and other members of the LGBT community feel protected and secure, free to live our lives without discrimination, harassment, threat and violence,” the claimant said in his statement. Copyright 2012 Dominica News Online, DURAVISION INC. All Rights Reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or distributed. Disclaimer: The comments posted do not necessarily reflect the views of DominicaNewsOnline.com and its parent company or any individual staff member. All comments are posted subject to approval by DominicaNewsOnline.com. We never censor based on political or ideological points of view, but we do try to maintain a sensible balance between free speech and responsible moderating. We will delete comments that: contain any material which violates or infringes the rights of any person, are defamatory or harassing or are purely ad hominem attacks a reasonable person would consider abusive or profane contain material which violates or encourages others to violate any applicable law promote prejudice or prejudicial hatred of any kind refer to people arrested or charged with a crime as though they had been found guilty contain links to "chain letters", pornographic or obscene movies or graphic images are off-topic and/or excessively long See our full comment/user policy/agreement. 103 Comments Man bites dogs July 24, 2019 Who are we having to tell others how to live their lifes playing God if ever there is a god. I am not Gay, but it’s up to a man /woman to do as they like behind closed doors, you black people are to dam nasty and hypocrites. Having said that many men like buggering their wife, girlfriends the lots even animals so don’t give me that crap 🚾 in my opinion religion things are backwards and all hypocrites here in Dominica there are so-called pastors and priest doing the most currupt things you would not believe, to name a few!!!! Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Bwa-Banday July 27, 2019 @Mbd let me remind you that between man and woman is called “advanced sex” so stop being naive. Matter of fact some women request and appreciate it. Therefore my friend, it is not buggering in the true sense . Lots of Prime Ministers and ministers from the region are known to cherish advanced sex. Go figure it out or just ask around in Dca and you will learn. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Not Mincing Words July 23, 2019 A bunch of sword fighters and crap pushers who took Pirates of the Caribbean literally. Exile them to a “penal / penile” colony if they continue with their dirty ways and save our God fearing country. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Shaka zulu July 23, 2019 Well the fastest way to human extinction is gays and lesbians. It is a biological fact that the relationship is solely for human pleasure and not the greatest gift bestowed to human; procreation. I acknowledge the fact that genetic and hormone imbalances can cause such biological confusion. That will never go away. If all what feels good is morally ok then why not legalize polygamy so that i can ensure that the sisters who are being denied a suitable partner are well taken care of. For every gay partner there are two women needing a man. I need to ensure the human race continue and cannot have fertile women sitting around not producing. I say legalize polygamy so i can have a couple wives its will be a great service to humanity. Give the LBGTQ thier rights one condition, that you legalize polygamy. Like or Dislike: 1 0 Reply Bwa-Banday July 29, 2019 I am with you Shaka 100000000% excepting for giving them rights. They all their rights already except for man buggering man until kingdom cum! Imagine if China legalizes man buggering man in addition with their 1 child policy? In twenty years there will be no more births. Thats why advanced sex is for pure pleasure with a woman because you can impregnate that same woman through vaginal sex. SAY NO to man buggering man for the sake of the human race Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Sheep July 22, 2019 Gay ppl are humans yes but if God wanted man to man or woman to woman, he God himself wud have put it so from start. I no we all have sin am nt sending any stones but this is just nt acceptable in anyway or form. Right now this country have even issues to be fix . Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Roger Burnett July 22, 2019 As a painter and sculptor I can only get passionate about the female, rather than the male. However, I respect the fact that Michelangelo was different. He could only get passionate about the male and his female nudes were taken from the male model with bits added or subtracted. Nevertheless, his sexual preference was fortunately secondary to the needs of the Catholic Church. If it had been otherwise, the Sistine Chapel ceiling would not exist. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply John Rambo July 22, 2019 If it’s the human right for two men or women to have sex with each other then we can just throw morality out the window. Go ahead and make yourself happy. In that case it’s my human right to have two wives or more!! It’s my human right to smoke what ever drug I want. You know what let’s just do things that makes ‘THE ME’ happy!! No matter the cost or effects. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply John Woolman III July 28, 2019 Yes, adults should be allowed to “marry” whomever consents to marry them. And in the number they find suits them. How does any of that affect you? It is simply not your business. If you want your government to enfore morality then try Saudi Arabia. Leave the church to handle morality and the government to handle road repair. And if what I smoke can do you no harm it is also none of your business. You have come out in opposition to freedom. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Trying To Get It Right July 22, 2019 I am not the sharpest tool in the box; however, basic physiology tells me that the anus has an excretory function where waste exits the body. Common sense tells me an obvious exit should not be used for entry. Simple logic tells me buggery is an unnatural act while the The Most High’s statutes tell me it is a sin. All sinners, including buggers, fornicators, liars, murderers, adulterers, thieves, etc (all of us) will have to give an account one day. At that time, denial will not be an acceptable response. By the way, I am not aware of any civil society where rape, stealing or murder is legal. That is why I believe trying to legitimize buggery is an abomination. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply rex July 22, 2019 The Lord is my Shepherd I shall not want. This Shepherd will guide us on the safe path. We have a right to answer to him. I just do not want any, ANY underage to be influenced, Father guide them. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply jahsmallJ July 22, 2019 Notice how small the Dominican flag is, while the other one is so much bigger? It’s not about love for the country or everones right, it’s about them trying to implose thier ways unto everyone else. We have seen it and see it happening other places all now. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Island peeps July 22, 2019 The govt should sue them for messing with our flag. These people are not fighting for privacy they are fighting to bring it out in the public. You as a man wants to kiss another man in public move to NY. Dominica have enough problems with hurricanes and floods. Dominica is for Dominicans but we don’t want that in our country. Move to where is accepted. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Dixie Normas July 22, 2019 lol Dominicans are a funny set, you all hide rapist, child molesters, thief, murders and corruption but you want to burn a gay man. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply viewsexpressed July 22, 2019 As a Dominican Dixie, do you feel you fall in this category too. We, I dont and openly expressed my views. A commentary came on social media that people are open expressed themselves, that most have done, So what is your issue? make a comment, let us read and analyse what guy wrote. We definitely will respect your views This is a an open social commentary to express yourself with some level of decency and what you stand for, and stand to it. Hope helpful and encouraging to yo and others. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Dixie Normas July 22, 2019 i dont have a problem with gays doing there do in the privacy of them private home. i dont like the few that believe because they gay they deserve special rights. Now Dominican hide their uncle who having sex with little girls or a boyfriend who sleep with their under age daughter but dont say anything because he pays the bills. i see people who murder people are defended by the Dominican society saying he is a “good boy”. Dominicans enjoying a life of corruption not only talking politics but business people who exploit workers, police beating people and dumping them by the bay. It have many ills in the Dominican society but once you here gay is like “fire burn” “kill the gays” “nasty sick people” as a liberal Dominican i just dont get why you all care where a man put is body part! Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Devils advocate July 22, 2019 Good point! There are all these allegations of sexual impropriety with minors among politicians and other individuals. Child sex abuse is a grave problem yet the biggest issue is whether two consenting men are having sex ignoring the fact that the law implicates men and women who have anal sex. And what of the number of single parent homes for those of us on the morality horse? And the number of children who do not know their fathers or are fathered by married men who keep it a secret. Maybe the abuse of our children is how we are paying for this sin of discrimination. The problem of sin is insidious, and if we think that homosexuality is an abomination then a closer look would reveal that our entire society is going to hell in a handbasket if we want to stand on these righteous perspectives of what we think is in the Bible. You go Nameless Person! Fight against this discrimination. The Jesus whose tunics we hide behind fought against discrimination and died because of it! Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Anon July 23, 2019 Apples and oranges! Are you saying that because some people break the law and get away with it buggery should be accepted. While we at it let us lagalize bestiality, which is legal in some countries. Again the big countries using local satellites to impose their decaying moral standards on us. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply NE One July 22, 2019 That is it. We have enough issues dealing with. That one just unnecessary. NO country needs Minorities. Just move n feel happy n safe. Inshalah’ Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply NO! July 22, 2019 So Adrian Ready for everybody! Well Not IN MY DOMINICA!!!! NOOO WAYYY! HOLY GHOST FIRE COME AND CLEANSE THIS LAND FROM THE DEMONIC SPIRIT OF HOMOSEXUALITY IN THE NAME OF JESUS! NEVER NEVER NEVER! WE DON’T WANT THAT SPIRIT OF SODOM AND GOMORRAH HERE IN THIS LAND! I REBUKE THE FORCES OF DARKNESS I BREAK THAT EVIL CURSE. NEVER WILL I, MY CHILDREN MY CHILDREN’S CHILDREN COM TO WITNESS AND ACCEPT THIS MONSTROSITY! THE BLOOD OF JESUS OVER THIS LAND AND ALL DEMON’S OF HELL I SEND YOU BACK INTO THE PIT FROM WHENCE YOU CAME!!!! Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply jamie July 22, 2019 Many of you are quick to judge,let god be the judge,we are all sinners,this is the problem with you people,gay people are humans also,stop judging we are all sinners. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Lord help this nation July 22, 2019 No they are not Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Marve July 22, 2019 Yes we are all sinners. Do you see sinners going to the court for right to be sinners. If a person murdered someone or a person raped someone, would you allow them to go to the courts for right to continue to rape and kill. I don’t think so. I pray that this demonic spirit will not take hold of Dominica. The LGBT have one agenda. A minority trying to control the world just like Sodom and Gomorrah. This is not our Dominica, may God through the blood of Jesus prevail over our country. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply joseph charles July 22, 2019 someone need to shut mr up!! Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Casio July 22, 2019 i like how they have the Dominica flag in front of their borgar flag. hilarious. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Makak Savanne July 22, 2019 What??!!! That’s the new Dominica flag in the background??? Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply viewsexpressed July 22, 2019 Our distinguished flag has no place up there and should be out of there. This is a personal matter and people have a right to express themselves and other people have a right to say that they dont condone this nonsense This is liberty, no discrimination, as anyone can comment on action they feel that are inappropriate and not in the spirit of decency and well-being. That is our thoughts, and people may oppose our thoughts, and that is ok. It will not hurt me. I am too far gone in life to be worried of something that I do not condone. But we have no right to insult these people but to insult the act itself as to of the same sex in their act cannot and unable to produce babies. Blessings to all and be expressive with decency for others. Some people may concur, other may object, Ce Lavie. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Frank N Stein July 22, 2019 As you all can see they are well sponsored. They are free to practice what they want in their bedrooms and criminalizing is not the best thing. However if we want to play “enlightened” while being blind to the fact that this is deeper we will regret. This is just a doorway for Daryl and his guys to pollute the place with their parade, etc etc and everything else gay comes with. Go ahead Daryl, I hope you are well paid by the infiltrators. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Mystalics Family July 21, 2019 STOP ALL U DORTY WAYS Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply D ghost July 21, 2019 I cannot believe they want to legalize what god burn down and turn a woman into a pillar of salt for. Man and man cannot multiply. Woman and woman either Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply mine July 21, 2019 If this is the life style they chose let God be their judge, but also keep it in your bedroom. iF anyone do this act to another without their consent they should be punished. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Son of Sam July 21, 2019 I remember the Prime Minister saying that he will not now and not in the foreseeable future legalize homosexuality/gay, he also said that no one is breaking into people houses to see what they are doing nor charging them for what they do in their houses. what I understood from that statement is you and your same-sex friends can do what you all want in the privacy of your homes but no pda. I really not sure what Mr. Philip wants again, tell me Daryl what do you want? You want to be able to walk holding hands and kissing on road? Do you want to be able to go to the gardens with your partner and make love in the open on a blanket in the sun? tell me cause i really don’t get it.. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Doctor July 21, 2019 Bugery is sodomy It is not sex and should not be called anal sex. Refrain from the temptation to refer what it is not Stop confusing the youth Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Nedd July 21, 2019 Gay pride logo on our national flag.. my God what a disgrace. Stop forcing the LGBTQ agenda on Dominica.. the warnings written in the bible are there for/ as a guide so that we will not destroy ourselves..the devil is on a rampage, wants to take the soul of this nation..wake up church!!. Take Canada as an example, they are persecuting Christians, sending them to jail for preaching the gospel.. the message is ” john 3:16. For God so love the world “”. As a people we have to keep our mouths open.. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Braindamage July 21, 2019 We in Dominica do not need that at all, at all..at all. We are a God fearing Nation and have had enough already here. All abominations will face justice. Keep off Daryle!! Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Dr. Clayton Shillingford July 21, 2019 Daryl Phillip is very courageous to come forward in support of court action on these controversial LGBT issues..I think that all sexual behaviour should be done in private and persons so inclined should not face violence or discrimination. Many countries are changing laws in respect of these issues. I am not in agreement with the church and religious zealots who claim that LGBT individuals go in that direction by choice. I am more inclined that like heterosexuals the conduct is driven by shifts in hormones in the individuals.. The tendency even begins to be apparent from childhood..Priests in the Catholic church partly because of celibacy vows have had to struggle with these hormonal drives and find themselves charged with sexual misconduct..with young boys. and women. I hope we will have commentary from lawyers and doctors on this issue. Here in Pennsylvania the church has established a fund for individuals who may have been sexually abused by priests long ago Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply viewsexpressed July 22, 2019 So Clayton, it is ok to condone Bestiality? This does not produce anything apart for some level of flattering and whatever else. I just do not see this act as normal or as Humane, it cannot produce anything. Do all your business in privacy please and leave us alone. It is the same way that we do not condone more than one wife or husband or marry children as young as 14. Those are insult to humanity and the pubic on a whole. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply peaceandlove July 21, 2019 I hope our leaders, both political and religious, will clearly indicate where they stand on this issue and other pressing issues of the day. These are not issues to be taken lightly. They are at our doorstep and need to be addressed with maturity and courage. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply dissident July 21, 2019 2 like pole on a battery produces nothing at all it would be a shame for us to put this issue before serious medical breakthroughs in Medical Cannabis i voting 5 million times for medical canabis over this fruitless nuisance it would be to embarrassing and counter productive for this issue to be on our front burner over more progressive electoral and health matters misplaced priorities to feel free to do whatever one pleases even when it produces negative reactions among de public………i am not prepared to promote a society of men only…..upsetting and attacking de creative principle life animals have sex to procreate…….no casual sex this action does not promote procreation….it actually fights against it ……disturbing de babalnce disturbance in de mentalities……doesn’t promote creative and productive societies…….this is actually a step back Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Bring back the kidnapped Dominican parrots July 21, 2019 Next they are going to want a law saying someone should be able to marry their dog and have sex with their dog. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply gayandproud July 21, 2019 I support this 100%. It is about time Dominica emerged from the stone age and joined the 21st century where all human beings, regardless of race, gender, religion, philosophy, and sexual orientation are treated as equal. The comments on this thread, however, demonstrate the level of ignorance and intolerance in this nation and the wider region that will forever make it an intolerant and backward-looking place. Hypocrisy reigns in the Caribbean region – no-one complains about the vast amounts of money gay people spend when they visit these islands on cruise ships. I wish you all the luck in the world with your action, for you will need it. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply viewsexpressed July 22, 2019 “t is about time Dominica emerged from the stone age and joined the 21st century where all human beings, regardless of race, gender, religion, philosophy, and sexual orientation are treated as equal. ” Ha ha ha lol…lol..lol What on earth do you mean emerge from stone age? s far as I read we avoiding this same sex stone age matter that is not healthy, nor can produce towards civilisation. This act of homosexuality and lesbianism is a private business, go practice in the decency and privacy of your home, dont get us involved please. It does not produce anything. This is what nature has given us and man made things are dangerous, so I stay far away from this immoral act, that does not produce anything. Some gay guys in Europe marry a woman, have a child, send the woman go and then marry a man. And a man calling the other man “Husband”. What nonsense. Is that not hypocritical un healthy, un-natural acts. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply citizensmith July 24, 2019 If you don’t understand what living in the stone age means, just look at your reply to this comment. You would probably endorse burning witches and nonbelievers. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply KaliNeg July 21, 2019 After all those natural disasters of hurricanes and storms that this slave plantation island have been experiencing, coupled with a one-man corrupt rogue regime, this is another abominable act that this man wants to bring on a very volcanic island Does he want the ten volcanoes to erupt and the earth shake beneath him causing multiple tsunami of waves to engulf the place I suppose elections is nigh, whilst the one-man corrupt rogue regime is still holding power, he’s trying to have his abominable way Why does he wants to impose something on a people of whom the majority is against We who love women don’t need any governments to make it legal for us! I hope the government doesn’t give in to these abominables ! Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Chris Mann July 21, 2019 cont: that life style but there is something or things that you would have inherited and is practicing. It’s for that reason HE (GOD) said,do not condemn another less you are condemning your own self.Sin in and of itself condemns .That’s not our place to condemn others.When that woman was brought before HIM ,they claimed was caught in the act of adultery.What was HIS final words to her: neither do I condemn you,go and sin no more less a worst thing come upon you. HE is GOD and was the only one of a truth that could condemn her but instead HE instructed her to go and sin no more.There’s no need for me to condemn Mr Phillip,I would be outta place but as Moses told the rebels in his camp: Their sins shall find them out.So it is for everyone of us today.Our sins shall find us out.STOP condemning other people less you are condemning your own self….. GOD BLESS…. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Chris Mann July 21, 2019 I will for ever repeat those words ;JAHOVAH ( GOD ) has spoken, HIS word has gone out and it will not return unto HIM void but all that he said will come to pass will come to pass,so it is written so shall it be.That life style is going to be prevalent in the end of time and so it will be. (1)There are many things that are abomination unto GOD (2) In regard to the end of time,HE did not only mentioned days of Sodom and Gomorrah but also the days of Noah. Stop quoting one and leaving out the other bcuz GOD mentioned the both times together.What we should be doing is putting the both times together and realizing whatta hell of a time that will be.Stop thinking highly of yourself so as to condemn another.None doth good no not one.We are all as sheep gone astray doing our own thing. Thus saith the LORD GOD. Homosexuality is a curse that GOD passed upon man and that was not the only thing mentioned when HE cursed man then, there are a whole lot more and so you might have not inherited Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply 小帕 July 21, 2019 Sooner or later we had to discuss this. It was only a matter of time. Thing is that if they get their legality to freely sodomize themselves openly, this changes our present and future society. It redefines love and marriage. We’d need new books, a new education system a new “accepting” people. I think it goes against the very fabric from which we’ve been made. I’d love to hear the political parties voice their opinion on this issue. For or against. 😂 Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Zandoli July 21, 2019 What fabric? The fabric to have extra-marital affairs? The fabric to have grown … adult men going after high school girls? The fabric to have two women pregnant at the same time? Give me a break with all this hypocrisy. Dominica is a place where the majority of children are born out of wedlock with only the mothers present to raise the children and you people want to present our society as being so wholesome? Tell that to a foreigner. I know better and all of you people who are trying to deny gays their rights also know it. We are a nation of hypocrites with no right to tell anyone how to live their lives. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply viewsexpressed July 23, 2019 Zandoli, your comments reference: “What fabric? The fabric to have extra-marital affairs? The fabric to have grown adult men going after high school girls? The fabric to have two women pregnant at the same time?” My response: I do not see the same issue as the topic reference to Gay, Lesbian etc. The difference is that these Gays and Lesbians etc are out there demanding that we accept, condone, promote their social, sexual behaviour that society has an issue with. On the other hand, no one is out there with placards promoting children born into wedlock, single parent, men having children with many mothers, the abuse (sexual etc) with children under age. So all these social misfits and abomination going on, no one has written, that we must follow this behaviour and promote it. So this matter of Gay/Lesbian and man marrying man, without a womb and women out there doing their business is forced on us to accept that behaviour. We have right to say no, but no fighting. I promote… Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply viewsexpressed July 22, 2019 l do not think that anyone can go on being “whatever”at any time. The issue is that there is that level of decency that human nature dictates, honours and respects and no one has the right to induce anyone, observing the laws of nature to promote, condone, or accommodate this nasty behaviour that these so called LGBT has attempted to sell to us. We abhor this act, behaviour. Nature accommodates between “Man & “woman”. The perfect laws of nature. If not those so called LGBT people probably would not have been born. We also hear and soon will be asked to be legalise, the dirtiness of “Bestiality”, people who have so called sex or (local” Bull, Bugger) any animal preferable and mostly Cows. From a little boy I have heard of this and the arrest of those man. The hurting thing is that there are so called gay men Out there who go after young boys. Iquote thistrue “influential statement” said to me“…you don’t have to worry, the Anal of a man is same as a woman. How insulting,… Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Zandoli July 21, 2019 I support the efforts of this group 100%. The government has no place in the bedrooms of the people. What are you guys afraid of? That you will catch the homosexual disease if consenting adults of the same sex express their love for each other the same way heterosexual members of society do? Let the people be. They are not asking for anything more than what the rest of us enjoy. Live and let live. Good luck in your efforts MiRiDom. If you guys have a GoFundMe campaign I shall contribute to your cause. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply viewsexpressed July 22, 2019 So Mr Zandoli, you condone and promote, also, Bestiality that also goes on and the going after children because they are seen to be, fresh and virgin”. A child must not be abused because seen as “fresh, innocent, a virgin and an attraction to go after. Bestiality is yetto be defined in some words as to what and how any decent man would go practice bestiality on an animal, moreseo a female cow. What has gone wrong with humanity. No two of the same sex can produce and have children. Nature has designed the best for us, yet we have bestiality (buggery) behaviours and so called “disgusting Sam sex acts that produces nothing, yet would go ask a woman to accept their sperm that they have a child. How disgusting. The laws f nature, are real and must not be robbed nor insulted due to personal disgusting behaviour. This will never be accepted by our people. This behaviour they will ignore as long as their young boys are not target. “Don`t ask me what i would Do. “God Bless us… Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Unknown July 20, 2019 Keep all you thing inside all you house. The law of the land stands. And yes I have gay friends, I don’t discriminate against them however I don’t condone that behavior either. What’s next people will want rights to make their pet their partner? Nobody saying don’t do all you thing, but keep behind closed doors, it’s not like they coming searching for all you, breaking down doors at night. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Adrian July 21, 2019 You fail to understand what this issue is about. Even behind closed doors, sexual activity is illegal. The state, nor anyone for that matter, has any business in people’s bedrooms. Note also that the buggery law does not only apply to gay men. Anal and oral sex between heterosexuals is also outlawed, and is punishable by up to ten years’ imprisonment. This is not fair, and is absurd in modern society. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply viewsexpressed July 22, 2019 Adrian, We are not interested in promoting, supporting and engaging anyone in Gay or lesbian nonsense. As nature dictates, this act of falseness does not and will produce anything. If you people want to be whatever, i whatever activity, please keep it n the confines of your privacy, wherever you live. But this idea and desperation to have embrace your activity in Gay mates and Feale matters is what we dont and will not condone. We have that right not to be part of this Gay/Lesbian Business. I have my Sperm, she has her Egg, this is the best of nature and everyone on this earth came in through this process. It takes naturally the sperm, the father (man Egg, the mother Woman)is nature that cannot be bought, changed, moved about with penetrate in the wrong place. That is how we feel. So we believe that people must keep their personal matters in the privacy of their bedrooms. Pretty soon, it will be ok for people to change the law that man has two wives & woman two husbands. God is Good Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Asaka July 21, 2019 Your comments do not demonstrate that you are a true friend to anyone who is gay. You cannot in one breath say you have gay friends but then shun them to their homes. Therefore, you are contradicting yourself. It is 2019 and the LGBT community internationally needs to also be protected. The law should NOT stand and needs changing. All people should be allowed to live free, with protection and respect. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply viewsexpressed July 22, 2019 Aska, your point is fruitless….this has nothing to do with “true Friend or not”. we respect every human being, but their acts, despicable it is, we dont condone, and we have the right to say we dont condone this and that, for example, married man running away with other women. A husband insults and beats his wife. Men after young boys influencing them to nonsense act of same sex. We have that to condemn the same way we say so to other matters of decency and humanity. Your private life is yours, not ours, so dont inflict it on us. We mind our own business. Jah Bless, Gods Guidance. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply viewsexpressed July 22, 2019 100% condone. Well said, well put Unknown. Nature ahs s=done it four us, yet some will go all over to condone despicable habits. keep all your business within the confines of your bedrooms and privacy and tell you so called “partners” stop messing about with young boys and teenagers. Stay away and go get a life. You as a man just cannot start a family with another man, that same sex, going nowhere, same goes for a woman. Nature offered her, motherhood, woman, wife. Able environment, the womb comes naturally. A man cannot produce, so do all your business privately, we dont need to know of you weird habits. Two men, two woman cannot start biological family. This is the aw if nature, and Gay/Bestiality behaviour is just not nature bliss. Please dont ask us to condone this un natural behavior. Nature says, Man = Woman. Not Adam & Steve. Gods Guidance. Amen Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Didymus July 20, 2019 stupes. This does not affect everyone my brother it affect queres like you.The laws on the book has to stay on the book.you people cannot wait for god to come so you all trying to make it quick. legalize it so that you guys can party in public. yes I say in public because more easement you all get is more you all fight for more rights, then the bible has to be destroyed because that’s the words that make you guys feel guilty. then preachers cannot preach the word of god. GOD will deal with you all. as it was in the days of sodom so shall it be in the last days. and god will repeat sodoms punishment to this world. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply ASHAMED AND UPSET July 20, 2019 So Buggar man want their rights now?? Buggaring is an abomination my brother..its against the natural way of life. All you buggar man to damn nasty and Salpet. Shait man. All u want God to Kwévé us like he did sodom and Gomorrah… All you doe find we getting hit too much by natural disasters… instead we start to pray as a nation all u them batty man want to now come out of the closet and try to destroy the moral fabric of society. Faya burn all all you dem LGBT.. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Empress July 21, 2019 Ignorance is bliss!!!! No one who is gay will face any hotter fire on judgement day. Stop using the bible as a refuge for your hatred. Your words are pure hatred. Look in your own home or back yard, LGBT infiltrates all homes. Promote love and not hatred. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply viewsexpressed July 22, 2019 Empress, you are out of line to tell us what we think, how we think which is a matter of what we stand for and the respect deserved. We have the right to express ourselves on maters that concern us, children, our community and country. This matter of judgement day has no business about this article. So please stay focus on the issue and concern., as we do appreciate your contribution and comments. The relationship between God and man and woman is a personal matter. You and I and others cannot and are unable to place condemnation on anyone. Wouldn’t on you please be guided accordingly. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply KID ON THE BLOCK July 20, 2019 God created Man and Woman to multiply the earth. That means Male and Female having sex to reproduce another of it’s kind. The evidence of such law is Adam and Eve. God did not create Adam and Steve or Eve and Eva. This animal kind of behavior of MAN and MAN or WOMAN and WOMAN is nasty and unGodly. Is this the LEGACY some of us want to leave to the younger ones? Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Johnboi July 21, 2019 But God also creates anomalies. Caster Somenya is a world class athlete, but she was born with testes where her ovaries should be. Siamese twins, Downs syndrome and so many others. Why not have tolerance for all God’s children. Or maybe we should take the bible literally and bring back stoning. And please don’t forget, the bible seems to be very happy with slavery which is rather conveniently forgotten these days. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply viewsexpressed July 22, 2019 ” Or maybe we should take the bible literally and bring back stoning.” Is that the best you can offer on this matter? You want be the one to caste the that first stone? We are tolerant and we speck our minds openly based on nature. We dont condone multiple wives like in other country, as they say its in the Quran but its the women/wives who suffer as second class citizens with hidden faces, can`t be entertained etc, and they say Allah. Be guided that this approach is varied in Islam countries, so appears interpreted by man wrongly and differently, just to get at woman with that macho hypocritical religious behaviour. Then we may ask that we men may want to marry 14, 15, 16 year olds., like in these Islam countries. How disturbing. We better becareful what we ask for? God is good, enjoy nature`s love and engaging of good behaviour. We respect, but dont condone what is asked for, so also respect our views all based n nature. God. nature has given us the tolls to recreate… Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Adrian July 21, 2019 God does not exist. Even if he did, religion has absolutely no impact on the making of legislation. Dominica is a democracy, not a theocracy. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Chakademus July 22, 2019 What an idiotic statement. The evidence of creation alone refutes your first assertion. Secondly, a country’s laws must be and are always based on common code of ethics. Laws don’t just sprout up out of the ground. This common code of ethics comes from a country’s religion, even if it’s not called religion. Sometimes you can call it a belief system or whatever but it’s the same thing. Without common ground a country will fall apart. Look at what happened when India fragmented and Pakistan was created. People with incompatible beliefs could not coexist so they went their separate ways. These sodomites are trying to introduce new beliefs that are incompatible with our traditional moral code, our common religion. This will lead to trouble, it won’t work with Dominican culture. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply viewsexpressed July 22, 2019 Kid on the Block, Congrats, well said, well put together. This is the first time I have support a comment of yours. well done, keep up that vibes. Guidance. Gods Blessings Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply TJ July 20, 2019 Good Show! ,We are moving in the right direction . Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Anansi July 20, 2019 Amigo, I knew you since Bath Road days. Please, Mr. Philips, as someone who respects you, watch the road you want to take Dominica down. Gay Pride parades are enough already. Having drag queens try to shove their lifestyles down my kids throats – you get the nigga in me to burst out. So Daryl, watch your next steps Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Asaka Will July 21, 2019 No need to threaten the man personally. He has been a stellar part of many upbringings especially by being a dance instructor in my early years and being part of theatre work (Once on this Island, Choreographer). Without him as our dance instructor many of us young women would not have showcased our talents as youth. He has also been instrumental in maintaining our cultural dance and history. No need to personally attack Mr. Phillip. His family is not only talented by music but by all arts. He will always have my support and respect. If you know him from Bath road, no threats but be a good neighbor. He is not threatening your kids or your lifestyle. Preach love. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Anansi July 22, 2019 Asaka, as a former officer, CDPF I have not or will never threaten any citizen of Dominica, especially those I have built up partnerships with over my career. All I am saying to Mr. Philip is that his way is part of a wider agenda that the majority of Dominicans do not want. I still respect him and admire his talents which he has so generously shared with his fellow Dominicans. But Asaka, his agenda I am not willing to accept. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Cork Kaka July 20, 2019 “I want to live in a Dominica where I and other members of the LGBT community feel protected and secure, free to live our lives without discrimination, harassment, threat and violence,” the claimant said. But tell the claimant I too don’t want to leave in a Dominica where cork kaka is legal. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Gouvelma July 20, 2019 Daryl Phillip at al need psychological counselling. Isn’t there more important issues in Dominica than fighting a battle to promote this nastiness? You are so proud of your actions, you filed a matter in the court to legitimize your nasty intentions and likes yet you hide your identity. Let the world know who you are so we know you are one of the back door entrants. Do not hide behind anonymity. Do not pollute our women. Get out of the closet so we know who you are ………….. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Zandoli July 21, 2019 So you can’t walk and chew gum at the same time? One does not preclude the other. It is high time Dominica gets into the 21st century. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Steve Foerster July 20, 2019 Good, I hope this challenge is a success. The state has no business regulating what consenting adults do in private. For those who want to make religious arguments against this sort of behaviour, that’s your prerogative, but in a free society it’s not the place of government to force your opinions onto others. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Unknown July 21, 2019 Steve if there is one time I must disagree with you is on this matter. What’s next? I man will say his cow is his, he feeds it so therefore can do as he please. Or how about incest which is illegal. Should a man and his adult daughter be allow to engage in sexual behavior if they consent to it. How about if one chooses to have several wives or husbands. Where do we draw the line, when do we say enough is enough? In every society have rules and laws in place which needs to be followed. Nobody is harassing them, breaking door their doors and arresting them. They walk the street, fete, and hangout in the same places we do. I don’t see anybody harassing them. Some of them are my friends but we cannot start normalizing deviations. It sets a very bad precedence Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Steve Foerster July 22, 2019 Unknown, I agree that at this time they are not being actively oppressed by government. But the very bad precedent is when laws are on the books that empower the state to meddle in the personal lives of consenting adults, and that’s what this is. And understanding that doesn’t require approval of their lifestyle. I’m sure my neighbours do all sorts of things that I wouldn’t, but that’s their call, not mine, and not government’s. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply viewsexpressed July 22, 2019 Well said, well put. Nice reading. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Jane July 21, 2019 Man. Take your nastiness for your self .they do it in there room why they want the laws for them now stay doing in you’ll room NASTY Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Steve Foerster July 22, 2019 Jane, come on now, no one is going to show up to do anything in your room. The point is that it’s none of the public’s business what they do in their room. That’s why there’s no role for government here. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Bring back the kidnapped Dominican parrots July 21, 2019 Are you a real Dominican? Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Ras I July 21, 2019 That white man disease will not be tolerated in Dominica. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Francisco Etienne-Dods Telemaque July 21, 2019 Steve, I hope you are not also disoriented; I would hope you are not part and parcel of the homosexual gang! That is a very bad thing; I had an uncle who was a notorious buggerman (homosexual); it is not two little boys he damaged; the man was jailed for buggering little at lease three times I know of, yet he never stop the practice to the day he died! When I was a little boy a Pentecostal preacher came to our village of Wesley, another notorious buggerman, he wreak havoc in the village: at 16 I went away; return from Europe living in Antigua, I ran into this old man at the time living in the village of Sweets in Antigua, old as he was, the still indulged in homosexuality. The next thing you know he live alone with a dog; he would sleep with the dog in his house, he died; when found by smelling death; upon entering the house, the dog had eat most of body! Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply viewsexpressed July 22, 2019 Thank you Steve, and also for them unto us, is wrong because in a free society it’s not the place of government to force your opinions onto others. Point taken. We stand on the side of nature. ne thig I will condone, is go do all you funky business in the privacy of your bedrooms. Please do not force or attempt to win us over with your despicable behaviour. The same way we feel of anting t change the laws that a man has two, three, four many wives etc. and woman ay want laws change to have many husbands and sow Bestiality will be on the law books. What a terrible web we weave. Please LGBT, go keep all you funky business in the privacy of your homes etc. Keep us, our churches etc out. Amen. Go find a life. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Bwa-Banday July 20, 2019 I am definitely against criminalizing consentual anal sex between a man and WOMAN. That is NOT buggery and should be exempted in the act since this is considered “ADAVANCED SEX” . Also, two women engaged in consentual sex is irie and should not be criminalized . However man buggaring man is pure nasty. So yes the laws should be revised to only criminalize sex between two men which is buggery. I rest my case Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Stephen July 21, 2019 So we should write laws based on your own personal sexual preferences? What else? Some laws based on your music tastes and maybe your favourite food. Please, lets have some intekectual debate here Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Adrian July 21, 2019 So you believe the laws should be written based on your personal tastes. How absurd and idiotic. About people do in their bedrooms is absolutely none of the government’s or your business. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Hmmm July 21, 2019 “Buggering” is the same whether a man or woman is on the receiving end. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Amarossa July 21, 2019 So you want to cherry pick which part of “nastiness” you want to suit your own unnatural tendencies? I can tell you are one of those guys who force anal sex on their girlfriends/wives. As far as I see it, if you can bugger a woman you can bugger a man. Plain and simple! So you are just as nasty as Daryl. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Bwa-Banday July 22, 2019 Don’t you understand Amarosa? Between a man and woman its called “ADVANCED Sex”. Please STOP referring to it as buggery immediately . Ask women from Antigua for instance and they will tell you how much they appreciate that. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Original767 July 20, 2019 My Boy just hold that for yourself for me please please please. The less of that homosexuality we can have in our little island the better. Let them go in the places that have it already and do what they want. We Do not want our laws changed. If that ever come through is trouble. Dominicans doe like them ting dr padner man. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Francisco Etienne-Dods Telemaque July 20, 2019 In all the years of my existence, I have never seen two male, or female dogs, neither have I ever seen any animal species of opposite sex trying to mate. Animals mate in the open, that is a natural event; if it was a normal thing for opposite sex to have sexual relationship, perhaps that would have been the same practice among animals. It is more than a disgrace when humans lower their status to beneath that of an animal. If this guy is a homosexual, he should keep that filth between him and the circle of homosexuals who associate with him; a damn old man like that rather than making his peace with God, is talking about defending homosexuality in court? Satan has his tools walking the face of the earth, even in Dominica, forcing his evil works and conduct into their mind; Daryl is oblivious to the fact that he is compelled by the devils of homosexuality to do what he is doing! He has no dignity! Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Andrew July 21, 2019 The internet is a wonderful thing. If you search you will find plenty of examples of homosexual acts in the animal kingdom, from dolphins to primates. It is natural. The law should be based on evidence not bigotry Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply viewsexpressed July 22, 2019 I have searched and we have found nothing of this sort. Animal Kingdom do not have brain and intelligence like we human. Please do not try to compare this irrelevant behaviour of humans, they have a brain to allow them to understand the difference. You put a bunch of men on an island on their own, no woman they will become extinct. Same goes for women. Nature , God has made us wonderfully. the man has the sperm, he seeks for a woman, a wife, because she has the egg, precious as they are, this is nature bliss, dont ask us to condone this nonsense, inhumane behaviour. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Francisco Etienne-Dods Telemaque July 22, 2019 Prove to me that two male dolphins mate, prove to me that dolphins are homosexuals. The devil is in control of people like you; unless you are biologically educated, or studied medical science this you will not comprehend, you will not find this on Google. Dogs are not capable of interbreeding with other carnivores such as weasels, or foxes which, although they are generally similar, are members of other distinct groups. The criteria I mentioned for species apply primarily to those that regularly outcross-interbreed with individuals other than themselves. In some groups of organisms, including bacteria, and many eukaryotes, asexual reproduction; that is reproduction without sex-predominates. The species of these organisms clearly cannot be characterized in the same way as the species of outcrossing plants and animals. Apply this to human behavior; after that justify your support and crave to practice homosexuality. To each his own; I see women as a special gift and comforter to… ADMIN: There are links to the sources in this wiki article which was found on google. You are free to disagree with their findings but the fact remains there has been substantial studies on this topic that are widely available. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Adrian July 21, 2019 Then you are quite clearly not a biologist. Sexual orientation is innate and cannot be altered, be it heterosexuality or homosexuality. This is supported by countless scientific studies and research. Did you know, for instance, that gay men tend to have larger penises than straight men?, are more likely to be left-handed?, etc.. There are thousands of patterns showing the difference between heterosexuals and homosexuals. Furthermore, God does not exist, and religion has absolutely no business in the making of legislation. Oh, and humans are animals. So, your idiotic “argument” is pointless. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Francisco Etienne-Dods Telemaque July 22, 2019 Adrian, it would be a waste of time to argue with you; nor try to dignify your ………..! I’ll tell you this; God said the fool said in his heart there is no God, you said God does not exists; I say the trinity: God Jehovah the Father; Jesus Christ, and the Holy Spirit do exist. I have experienced the power, and miracles of God in my personal life! You can talk crap, about I am not a biologists, as much as you wish; you do not know me! ………………………… Any person who majored in Health Science, even with a rear hope of becoming a medical doctor, must either major in biology, or must take biology and human anatomy as a prerequisite I been there, done that! If you are a homosexual, that’s you funeral: I love women, married twice and divorce, have children, grandchildren, and great grandchild. I had my first human sexual encounter with a woman at age 17; she was 27! ADMIN: As a reminder: we encourage you to make your response without insulting the other individual on this forum. If you disagree explain with a post, explain why without resulting to using insulting words or other ad hominem attacks. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Francisco Etienne-Dods Telemaque July 22, 2019 “Then you are quite clearly not a biologist.” Admin: that in the quote is not a question asked; it is a closed statement, an insult to my intelligence, in any event the person classify me as an idiot! What is good for the goose is good for the gander, if you give one person the right to attack, and trample another, the victim should have the same privilege of defending. How can that person determine I am not a biologists, when he/she does not know me, have no clue as to my educational background! I in fact have a medical background which I obtained by majoring in Health Science, been to medical school, and drooped out, to get to any medical school biology is one of the main prerequisite to becoming a medical doctor In addition to that I am an Electronic/Electrical Engineer by profession; at least give me some credit, and respect my opinions where it pertains to the disgusting practice of homosexuality! Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply viewsexpressed July 22, 2019 Whoooaa. so here we go: God does not exist, and religion has absolutely no business in the making of legislation. So you think is a damning prejudicial statement for us because of what we believe and we cannot , must not comment on their inhuman behaviour doing otherwise to what Nature (God) has given us to procreate? But you want them to get into our personal business and condone what we disagree to. Like in the bible, there are commandments, for example, “Thou shall not steal “Or maybe we should take the bible literally and bring back stoning” . …… thoughts, for sure coming from you. You all over the place and unsure of what principles yo stand for. Nature or Worldly Goods, behaviours. You work it out. I`m kool, I know where I stand. I am strong. Jah, God Bess all. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply viewsexpressed July 22, 2019 This entire garbage from this Adrian is disgusting. Please someone, tell me what this nonsense script is about? Sexual orientation has to go somewhere, not just the organs. Is Bestiality a common human behaviour., or some are just guided to it because it may resemble that of a woman`s vagina? Is that what it is? Having larger measured penis is irrelevant and therefore you are disgustingly out of context. I don`t want to get involved in this matter as its not and never will be natural to me. . Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply viewsexpressed July 23, 2019 Ohhhh Adrian Grrrrrrr. Not making sense to me. We look for something to condone what is happening to compare. You u a bunch of gay men and lesbian on an island, as one has said, they will become extinct. Nature us here for us to multiply and not have this same sex business promoted. This group has been trying for years to have people accept and condone this weird behaviour, but for sure this in=s not natures bliss. This goes nowhere and please gay men and Lesbian women, get on with you stuff and let us get on with ours. And tell yo gay friends, don`t run after woman to have a child, dump her and then go marry a man who is unable to get pregnant. nature has beautifully given us “man” the opposite sex, a “woman”. this is natures bliss. Do not ask us to condone this nastiness please. Anal is not made for penetration, it is to pass excretion. This is natures Bliss, and cant be accepted fr other matters and purposes. I leave you all in your own place of ??? A man cannot get pregnant. Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Ripe patat July 20, 2019 Of all the corruption and politics going on in this country right now, ……is first on your agenda? Nonsense Like or Dislike: 0 0 Reply Post a Comment | Cancel Reply Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked * Comment more » characters available Name * Email * Website Privacy Policy Disclaimers Comment Policy Frequently Asked Questions Contact Us Copyright © 2007-2026 Dominica News Online, Duravision Inc • Roseau, Dominica • All rights reserved.