Guyana's transgender activists fight archaic law - BBC News BBC Homepage Skip to content Accessibility Help Your account Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live More menu More menu Search BBC Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Close menu BBC News Menu Home Climate World UK Business Tech Science Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures More BBC Verify Newsbeat World Africa Asia Australia Europe Latin America Middle East US & Canada Guyana's transgender activists fight archaic law Published 26 March 2017 Share close panel Share page Copy link About sharing Image caption, Petronella Trotman was told by the magistrate to "dress like a man" By Carinya Sharples Georgetown, Guyana As a transgender woman living in Guyana, Petronella Trotman has grown accustomed to violence and daily abuse on the streets. But when she was physically attacked in January, while walking in Georgetown, the South American country's capital, she decided to seek justice. "The young man came up to me and asked if it was me who disrespected him the other night," she said, in reference to a previous argument with her alleged assailant. "And he joock [stabbed] me to my neck with scissors. I fell to the ground and when he left, I ran away. Then he came back with some glass bottles and pelted me down." "It happens a lot here in Guyana to transgender women," she added. "We live in a very homophobic society." Guyana country profile Ms Trotman reported the matter to the police and the case went to Georgetown Magistrates Court. But seeking justice as a transgender woman is not easy in Guyana due to a colonial-era law, now 124 years old, that criminalises cross-dressing. Guyanese Summary Jurisdiction Act Passed in 1893 when Guyana was still a British colony Makes it illegal for men to dress as a woman and vice versa, if done for "any improper purpose" The definition of "any improper purpose" is open to interpretation by magistrates Its opponents say it is open to abuse as its wording is "vague" and "broad" On her first day in the courtroom, Ms Trotman was told by the presiding magistrate to "dress like a man" at her next court date. When she returned to court on 2 March to hear the final verdict, she defiantly wore a blue top and a long, patterned skirt. This time, Magistrate Dylon Bess refused her entry, citing "inappropriate dress". Image caption, A sign outside the courtroom outlines the dress code "I felt really bad because the magistrate ordered me out of the court and he literally tried the case without me," Ms Trotman told the BBC. The case was dismissed and, with Ms Trotman not allowed inside the court, she only learned of the decision when her alleged attacker shared the news upon leaving the courtroom. 'Dereliction of duty' Magistrate Bess defended his demand that Ms Trotman dress in male clothes. Image caption, Activists protested against the decision outside Georgetown Magistrates Court He said that while it was "a preference and not a requirement" that transgender women dress as men in his courtroom, "sometimes persons commit offences dressed as males and then when they appear in court dressed as a female it can have implications for how a victim can identify his or her accuser, or vice versa". He also said that it would be up to parliament to abolish Guyana's law criminalising cross-dressing and not a court of law. The managing director of Guyana's Society Against Sexual Orientation Discrimination (SASOD), Joel Simpson, strongly disagrees. "It's really a dereliction of duty for Magistrate Bess to say that parliament has to change the law," he said. "While he is a magistrate, not a judge, the court should not be applying an unjust, unconstitutional law... Where there's conflict, the constitution prevails." 'Take the lead!' A former president of the Guyana Bar Association, Ronald Burch-Smith, also questioned the continued application of the law. Image source, SASOD Image caption, Activists have been organising marches to demand equal rights "There's a legitimate concern when it comes to things like crime and robbery, that persons dressed in disguise might take advantage of female clothing," he said. "But in the [cases] that have come up so far that has never been an issue. It's taking advantage of an already oppressed minority. "I think the courts should take the lead in recognising that these things are irrelevant to justice." Opposition to the cross-dressing law was sparked in 2009 when transgender activist Quincy McEwan and six others were arrested and fined for loitering and wearing female attire. In protest, Ms McEwan founded Guyana Trans United (GTU) and in 2010 launched a Supreme Court challenge against the cross-dressing law, in partnership with sister organisation SASOD and the University of the West Indies' Rights Advocacy Project, U-RAP. When the case came before the court in 2013, Guyana's then-chief justice, Ian Chang, ruled that cross-dressing was legal unless done for an "improper purpose". He did not say what constituted an improper purpose. Seeking clarification, Ms McEwan and her supporters took the matter to Guyana's Court of Appeal, denouncing the law as "discriminatory" and "unconstitutional". But late in February they received the news that their appeal had been dismissed and Mr Chang's ruling upheld. 'Let our voices be heard' Although frustrated with the decision, GTU and SASOD are determined to press on. Image source, SASOD Image caption, Members of SASOD say they will continue to protest "Our next step is to continue to have protests, let our voices be heard and then to get a petition before parliament," Ms McEwan said. "And we're not stopping there. We're going to appeal our matter before the Caribbean Court of Justice." If the Caribbean Court of Justice upholds their case, Guyana will have to amend its laws. "That's the highest court so we will have to follow the decision," said Attorney General Basil Williams. LGBT activists will likely face opposition along the way, particularly from religious pressure groups. "The Church is one factor in all of this," said the Attorney General. "But as time goes by everything becomes more enlightened." Ms Trotman is hoping change comes soon. Without the money to appeal Magistrate Bess's decision, she said: "I finished with the case. It's sad but what you can do? Certain laws need to be changed. It's very discriminating to us here in Guyana. When you're one thing and people want you to be something else." More on this story Guyana country profile Published 11 December 2023 The video playlist Watch our pick of standout clips from across the BBC Previous Next 1:31 The ups and downs of SpaceX's Starship test flights. 00:01:31, play video The ups and downs of SpaceX's Starship test flights 1:18 At the scene of counter-terrorism operation near RAF Fairford. 00:01:18, play video At the scene of counter-terrorism operation near RAF Fairford 0:39 Hundreds block Orange Order march in Northern Ireland. 00:00:39, play video Hundreds block Orange Order march in Northern Ireland 0:56 PM proposes NHS style social care system for England. 00:00:56, play video PM proposes NHS style social care system for England 1:13 Buckingham Palace hosts dance lessons. 00:01:13, play video Buckingham Palace hosts dance lessons 1:03 Is Labour's housing scheme a new idea, or an old Tory one? 00:01:03, play video Is Labour's housing scheme a new idea, or an old Tory one? 0:55 How to win an aura battle. 00:00:55, play video How to win an aura battle 1:35 The peculiar way Poirot got his walk. 00:01:35, play video The peculiar way Poirot got his walk 1:27 Could Manchester City lose some of its trophies? 00:01:27, play video Could Manchester City lose some of its trophies? 1:30 Using AI to detect fake goods online. 00:01:30, play video Using AI to detect fake goods online 0:47 'They've behaved so badly' says Man City fan. 00:00:47, play video 'They've behaved so badly' says Man City fan 1:10 Is it OK to take an iced coffee to a job interview? 00:01:10, play video Is it OK to take an iced coffee to a job interview? 1:09 What are the charges against Man City? 00:01:09, play video What are the charges against Man City? 0:35 Rory Stewart on his viral Newsnight moment. 00:00:35, play video Rory Stewart on his viral Newsnight moment 1:08 Why is the Pope in France? 00:01:08, play video Why is the Pope in France? 0:47 Should we ban the word 'awesome'? 00:00:47, play video Should we ban the word 'awesome'? 1:37 Question Time panel clash over welfare policy. 00:01:37, play video Question Time panel clash over welfare policy Top stories Five arrested as counter-terror police investigate major incident near RAF Fairford Published 1 hour ago What we know about RAF Fairford counter-terror probe Published 1 hour ago Burnham proposes NHS-style social care system for England Published 7 hours ago More to explore Celebrity Traitors 2 cast: Who are this year's 'big dogs' and dark horses? I was born while my mother was in an iron lung Killer Christa Pike to be executed within days - but her defence say she's a victim too Child's hidden letter found after 44 years I was angry at my husband - I didn't know he had dementia School holiday fines climb despite growing backlash 'Our wedding present left us gutted': Couple join dozens in car seller dispute US Politics Unspun: Cut through the noise with Anthony Zurcher's newsletter Could an iced coffee freeze you out of the job market? Elsewhere on the BBC Anne Hathaway and Jessica Chastain star in a psychological thriller How many dead people are on the internet? The hit podcast explores Thomas More's iconic text 'Utopia' Was Colin Norris wrongly convicted of killing his patients? Most read 1 Five arrested as counter-terror police investigate major incident near RAF Fairford 2 What we know about RAF Fairford counter-terror probe 3 Burnham proposes NHS-style social care system for England 4 No handshakes between Republic of Ireland and Israel 5 Ten NHS staff removed over Noah Woods data breach 6 Orange Order march row goes to heart of ongoing divisions in Northern Ireland 7 Two mass shootings in South Africa leave 27 dead 8 Killer Christa Pike to be executed within days - but her defence say she's a victim too 9 Celebrity Traitors 2 cast: Who are this year's 'big dogs' and dark horses? 10 Traitors star burgled after sharing holiday photos BBC News Services On your mobile On smart speakers Get news alerts Contact BBC News Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Careers BBC emails for you Advertise with us Copyright © 2026 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.