Gambia | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Gambia At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? No Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? No Legal Gender Recognition Possible? No LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? No Last Update: March 12, 2026 Gambia has criminalized same-sex conduct since the British colonial era. In 2014, the Criminal Code (Amendment) Act of 2014 introduced a new offense of “aggravated homosexuality,” including “serial offenders” and consensual sexual acts involving persons living with HIV and persons with disabilities, with a sentence of life imprisonment. It was signed into law by former president Yahya Jammeh, who also threatened to “decapitate” gay people. A new criminal code , issued in March 2025, removes language on “aggravated homosexuality.” However, it sets a minimum sentence of five years for “unnatural offenses,” defined as including “any homosexual act with another person,” and a minimum sentence of three years for “gross indecency,” which is also defined as “any homosexual act.” No maximum sentence provided, suggesting that any same-sex sexual act could result in up to life in prison. The government of President Adama Barrow, which came into power in 2017 after 22 years of dictatorial rule by Jammeh, has not typically enforced anti-homosexuality laws, and Barrow dismissed homosexuality as “ not an issue ” in the country in 2017, citing more “pressing” priorities. However, in April 2025, two men were arrested and charged with gross indecency. The Brusubi Magistrate’s Court sentenced them to five years in prison in March 2026, with the judge accusing them of acting “without any remorse to corrupt the minds of the whole nation.” There are no legal protections for LGBTIQ persons who face discrimination in accessing essential goods and services, such as housing, employment, and health care. There is strong societal discrimination against LGBTIQ persons, according to the 2023 U.S. Department of State Human Rights Practices Report. There are also no recognized organizations advocating for LGBTIQ people’s human rights in the country. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International