BBC Homepage Skip to content Accessibility Help Your account Home News Sport Earth Reel Worklife Travel Culture Future Music TV Weather Sounds More menu More menu Search BBC Home News Sport Earth Reel Worklife Travel Culture Future Music TV Weather Sounds Close menu BBC News Menu Home Climate World UK Business Tech Science Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures More BBC Verify Newsbeat Scotland Scotland Politics Scotland Business Edinburgh, Fife & East Glasgow & West Highlands & Islands NE, Orkney & Shetland South Tayside & Central Judge rules Scottish guidance for housing trans prisoners is unlawful Image source, PA Media By Iona Young BBC Scotland News Published 19 June 2026 A judge has ruled that prison guidance which allows some transgender prisoners to be held in jails matching their gender identity, rather than their sex at birth, is unlawful. Judge Lady Ross said , external sex segregation in prisons must be based on biological sex, based on a Supreme Court ruling on the definition of a woman in equality law in April last year. Campaign group For Women Scotland challenged the Scottish government guidance through a judicial review, saying only those born biologically female should be held in the women's estate. Lawyers for the government had argued this would breach transgender prisoners' human rights. The first minister said they will take time to consider the judgement. Lady Ross said the guidance was "in conflict with the requirement that prison accommodation be provided separately for men and women" and constituted "a mis-statement of the law". She said: "In all the circumstances, the prisons guidance is unlawful." Is there a lack of clarity around UK's gender laws? Published 20 February 2025 'Blanket rule' for trans prisoners would violate rights, ministers to argue Published 20 January Suicide risk if trans prisoners are put in jails based on sex at birth, court told Published 5 February Currently the Scottish Prison Service (SPS) uses a system of individual risk assessments which aims to keep anyone who poses a danger to women out of the female estate. However, it does allow for circumstances where trans women - born biologically male - could be housed alongside women if they are deemed not to pose an unacceptable risk to them. The Supreme Court ruling emphasised that all prisoners retain rights under the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR), including transgender prisoners. It accepted that Article 8, which protects private and family life, is engaged in decisions about prison accommodation. However, the court said Article 8 does not mean there is automatically a right for a transgender prisoner to be housed in a prison designated for the opposite biological sex. Lady Ross said the right was qualified and may be restricted where there is a legitimate justification, including maintaining sex-based segregation within the prison estate. The judge acknowledged that exceptional circumstances could arise. In a case involving a serious threat to life, such as a risk of suicide, Article 2 of the ECHR — which protects the right to life — might require consideration of whether accommodation in a prison for the opposite biological sex was necessary. Image source, PA Media Image caption, Co-directors of For Women Scotland (left to right) Susan Smith, Marion Calder and Trina Budge outside Parliament House in Edinburgh For Women Scotland brought the case following its successful appeal to the Supreme Court about the definition of a woman in the Equality Act. Susan Smith, a co-director of the group, said it was "delighted" to have won a "comprehensive victory". "We hope that, in future, the Scottish government will start to listen to us rather than the lobby groups who drafted these policies and have so egregiously misled MSPs and MPs," she said. "We should never have needed to take this case and we hope this will be the last time that we are forced to go to law to defend the rights of women." Image source, PA Media Image caption, Swinney said the government need time to consider the implications of the judgement First Minister, John Swinney told BBC Scotland Lady Ross's judgement was complex and the government will take time to consider its implications. He said: "We will consider all of these details because there are complex issues that are involved, but at this early stage I acknowledge the outcome of the judgement from Lady Ross and the government will consider its findings. "We will assess the implications the judgement has on carrying out policy in relation to the handling of prisoners. "The government will do that work and respond accordingly to the judgement that has been made." Scottish Conservative equalities spokesperson Meghan Gallacher said the SNP had "failed" to implement the Supreme Court ruling. She urged John Swinney to rule out defending any further gender self-ID policies in court and to implement the verdict across public bodies. Related topics Scotland Scottish government Women's rights LGBT Women Transgender people The video playlist Watch our pick of standout clips from across the BBC Previous Next 1:09 What are the charges against Man City? 00:01:09, play video What are the charges against Man City? 0:35 Rory Stewart on his viral Newsnight moment. 00:00:35, play video Rory Stewart on his viral Newsnight moment 1:37 Question Time panel clash over welfare policy. 00:01:37, play video Question Time panel clash over welfare policy 1:06 BBC boss warns some channels and radio stations may close. 00:01:06, play video BBC boss warns some channels and radio stations may close 0:49 Greece urges UK to return Parthenon sculptures. 00:00:49, play video Greece urges UK to return Parthenon sculptures 0:43 What was on the menu at the White House state dinner? 00:00:43, play video What was on the menu at the White House state dinner? 1:02 How we know this is an altered photo. 00:01:02, play video How we know this is an altered photo 0:47 Why Gen-Z are ditching cardio for weights. 00:00:47, play video Why Gen-Z are ditching cardio for weights 1:09 Why has half of this house disappeared? 00:01:09, play video Why has half of this house disappeared? 1:15 FA Cup assistant ref says tumours ended his career. 00:01:15, play video FA Cup assistant ref says tumours ended his career 0:57 Inside the Trump-Xi White House dinner. 00:00:57, play video Inside the Trump-Xi White House dinner 1:09 Would you chase a friend for £5? 00:01:09, play video Would you chase a friend for £5? 1:09 No advantage for 'nepo-babies': Zeta-Jones. 00:01:09, play video No advantage for 'nepo-babies': Zeta-Jones 0:52 A rapid new test to help brain tumour patients. 00:00:52, play video A rapid new test to help brain tumour patients 1:04 New GCSE subjects for teens in England. 00:01:04, play video New GCSE subjects for teens in England 1:10 Protests over eviction of 87-year-old. 00:01:10, play video Protests over eviction of 87-year-old 2:09 'My partner raped me while I was sleeping' 00:02:09, play video 'My partner raped me while I was sleeping' 1:00 Police warn of rise in vape spiking. 00:01:00, play video Police warn of rise in vape spiking 1:21 'Miracle' device easing teens Tourette symptoms. 00:01:21, play video 'Miracle' device easing teens Tourette symptoms 1:20 Children found to have ketamine bladder damage. 00:01:20, play video Children found to have ketamine bladder damage Top stories Man City found guilty of breaking financial rules Published 11 minutes ago What could the potential sanctions for Man City be? Published 5 hours ago I'm not tempted to call an early election, Burnham says Published 3 hours ago More to explore Just how hot and dry was your summer? Use our postcode lookup to find out Treadmills to deadlifts: Why Gen Z are swapping cardio for strength training From weeks to hours - the rapid new test transforming brain tumour diagnosis What are my children exposed to? Why I want testing for cancer-causing chemicals From Nagaland to a path to the Oscars: Indian film brings a rarely seen world to global cinema 'We're all broke': Would you chase a friend for £5? Why Trump gave Xi an ornate bald eagle statue at the state dinner Ministers reject dog ownership licence scheme New policies, election speculation: What to expect from Burnham's first Labour conference as PM Elsewhere on the BBC Anne Hathaway and Jessica Chastain star in a psychological thriller How many dead people are on the internet? The hit podcast explores Thomas More's iconic text 'Utopia' Was Colin Norris wrongly convicted of killing his patients? Most read 1 British climber dies after falling 60m on Spanish mountainside 2 Daniel Thomas pleads not guilty after dinghy slashed 3 U2 celebrate 50th anniversary at the school where they formed 4 Trump's plans for massive arch move ahead 5 Some BBC channels and radio stations may well have to close, director general says 6 Noah Woods left playground through gap in fence, inquest hears 7 I'm not tempted to call an early election, Burnham says 8 'Heartbreaking': The man set to lose his home due to the UK's £5bn theme park 9 Students strike across Germany in protest against military service 10 How 'largest phone smuggling network' was uncovered BBC News Services On your mobile On smart speakers Get news alerts Contact BBC News Home News Sport Earth Reel Worklife Travel Culture Future Music TV Weather Sounds Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Careers BBC emails for you Advertise with us Copyright © 2026 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.