Transgender people in prison - KFN Skip to content Search: Search: de Blog About Team Institute & Association Vacancies Contact Research Aetiology of Deviance Victimology Institutions of Social Control Methods Department Research Projects Publications Journal articles Book publications KFN research reports KFN statements Selected lectures Events MschrKrim Blog About Team Institute & Association Vacancies Contact Research Aetiology of Deviance Victimology Institutions of Social Control Methods Department Research Projects Publications Journal articles Book publications KFN research reports KFN statements Selected lectures Events MschrKrim Transgender people in prison The German penal system is based on the so-called principle of separation (cf. § 170 para. 2 of the Lower Saxony Correctional Facility Act). Up to now, it has relied on a binary-biological division of men and women who are accommodated in separate sections or institutions. A form of accommodation corresponding to one’s gender identity has only been practiced in exceptional cases. The accommodation of transgender persons in the penal system thus stands in tension between the right to gender identity derived from the general right of personality (Article 2 para. 1 in conjunction with Article 1 para. 1 of the Basic Law) on the one hand, and the unsubstantiated but sometimes presumed risks to fellow inmates on the other. Research has hardly addressed this tension and the associated questions so far. There is a lack of information about the number of transgender people in prison, but also a lack of evidence about their experiences and needs as well as about the challenges for correctional facilities in dealing with this issue. The goal of the project, which is funded by the Lower Saxony Ministry of Science and Culture (funding program: Pro*Niedersachsen), is to conduct an in-depth examination of the legal framework and prison practice with regard to transgender persons, to identify potential needs for change, and to formulate recommendations for policymakers and the prison system. The project is scheduled for two years and based on a modular research design including an analysis of relevant legal regulations, quantitative surveys of state justice departments and prison managers, and qualitative interviews with prison staff and incarcerated transgender persons. The written survey of the ministries of justice and the prison administrations is being conducted in co-peration between the KFN and the Protestant University of Applied Sciences Freiburg. Project related publication s Schüttler, H., Knaack, L., Wössner, G., & Schramm, V. (2025). Zwischen Zuweisung und Selbstbestimmung. Perspektiven von Justizministerien auf die Vollzugspraxis bei trans*, inter* und nichtbinären Personen. Neue Kriminalpolitik, 37(3), 305-321. https://doi.org/10.5771/0934-9200-2025-3-305 Schramm, V., Wössner, G., Schüttler, H., Bartz, L. & Bartsch, T. (2025). Trans und Inter in Haft – wandelnde Anforderungen an den Justizvollzug? In T. Vester, J. Kinzig, J. Grafe, B. Iberl, S. Schreier, & K. Stelzel (Hrsg.). Am Puls der Zeit?! Trends, Transfer und Tradition in der Kriminologie (S. 582-595). Mönchengladbach: Forum Verlag Godesberg. Download Schüttler, H., Winter, E., & Klebe, L. (2024). Trapped in binary gender logic. Legal developments and social realities of transgender individuals in German prisons. Forensische Psychiatrie, Psychologie, Kriminologie, 18, 265-272. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11757-024-00839-2 Project period: 01.10.2023 - 30.09.2025 Financing: Head of the project: Dr. Laura Bartz (former Klebe) Psychologist, M.Sc., Criminologist, M.A. +49 511/34836-17 Laura.Bartz@kfn.de Prof. Dr. Tillmann Bartsch deputy Director, Jurist + 49 511/34836-13 Tillmann.Bartsch@kfn.de Employees: Dr. Helena Schüttler Sociologist, M.A. (on parental leave) +49 511/34836-37 Helena.Schuettler@kfn.de Leonie Schulz Gender Studies, M.A. Leonie.Schulz@kfn.de Imprint Data protection Contact Newsletter © Criminological Research Institute of Lower Saxony