Afghanistan | Human Dignity Trust News Contact Us Search Twitter Facebook Instagram Human Dignity Trust Donate Menu Home LGBT people & the law Map of Jurisdictions that Criminalise LGBT People A History of LGBT Criminalisation Status of Commonwealth Sexual Offence Laws What We Do Where We Work Strategic litigation Changing Laws, Changing Lives Who We Are Our Team Our Board Our Patrons Legal Panel Bar Panel Commonwealth Group of Experts Our Funders Jobs & Consultancies Support Us Donate Leave a Legacy of Love Corporate Partnerships Trusts and Foundations Resources Videos Search for something Submit search query Search Donate Home LGBT people & the law Expand dropdown Map of Jurisdictions that Criminalise LGBT People A History of LGBT Criminalisation Status of Commonwealth Sexual Offence Laws What We Do Expand dropdown Where We Work Strategic litigation Expand dropdown Belize: A constitutional challenge to the laws criminalising same-sex activity Eastern Caribbean: Constitutional challenges to multiple laws criminalising same-sex activity Sri Lanka: Case before UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) Namibia: Case before the High Court Mauritius: Case before Supreme Court European Union: A case before the Court of Justice Jamaica: Case Decided by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights Northern Cyprus: Petition before the European Court of Human Rights Singapore: Two separate cases before the Court of Appeal Changing Laws, Changing Lives Expand dropdown Seychelles Penal Code (Amendment) Act 2024 Who We Are Expand dropdown Our Team Our Board Our Patrons Legal Panel Bar Panel Commonwealth Group of Experts Our Funders Jobs & Consultancies Support Us Expand dropdown Donate Leave a Legacy of Love Corporate Partnerships Trusts and Foundations Resources Expand dropdown Videos News Contact Us Twitter Facebook Instagram Afghanistan Afghanistan criminalises same-sex sexual activity between men and between women. Sentences include a maximum penalty of death under Sharia law. There is evidence of the law being enforced in recent years, and LGBT people are regularly subjected to discrimination and violence. Last updated: 19 January 2026 Types of criminalisation Summary Law and Legal Developments Enforcement Discrimination and Violence Disclaimer Types of criminalisation Criminalises LGBT people Criminalises sexual activity between males Criminalises sexual activity between females Imposes the death penalty Summary Same-sex sexual activity is prohibited under the Penal Code 2017, which criminalises acts of ‘sodomy’, ‘inciting sodomy’, and other forms of intimacy. These provisions carry a maximum penalty of two years. Both men and women are criminalised under the law. The Penal Code allows for the implementation of Sharia law, under which same-sex sexual activity is punishable by death. In addition to the Penal Code, the ‘Propagation of Virtue and Prevention of Vice Law’, enacted by the Taliban in August 2024, further codifies the criminalisation of same-sex sexual intimacy and the persecution of LGBT people. The primary source of law in Afghanistan is Islamic law. The passage of the revised Penal Code in 2017 was praised by the UN for its compliance with international obligations, however there has been a return to strict Sharia law following the takeover of the Taliban in 2021. There is substantial evidence of the law being enforced in recent years, with LGBT people being frequently subject to arrest, though it is often unclear whether these arrests result in convictions. There have been consistent reports of discrimination and violence being committed against LGBT people in Afghanistan in recent years, including murder, assault, and harassment. The situation has significantly worsened following the Taliban takeover in 2021, with many reports of violent hate crime and murder being committed against LGBT people. Law and Legal Developments 2025 On 23 January, the Office of the Prosecutor of the International Criminal Court filed two applications for arrest warrants for the Leader of the Taliban and the Chief Justice of the “Islamic Emirate of Afghanistan”. The Prosecutor’s Office concluded that these two individuals bear criminal responsibility for the crime against humanity of persecution on gender grounds, and that they are criminally responsible for persecuting Afghan girls and women, as well as “persons whom the Taliban perceived as not conforming with their ideological expectations of gender identity or expression”. The applications specifically refer to the targeting of “members of the LGBTQI+ community, who were singled out for certain types of persecution and connected criminal acts”. 2024 Freedom House’s Freedom in the World report notes that the legal situation remains unchanged following the Taliban takeover: “the Taliban support the former republic’s criminalization of same-sex relations and reject LGBT+ rights.” Further, it notes that there is no legal protection for LGBT people, and transgender Afghans have been detained by the Taliban. Amnesty International’s 2024 report on Afghanistan notes that “same-sex consensual relations remained illegal and punishable by death.” In August, the Taliban’s Supreme Leader enacted the ‘ The Propagation of Virtue and Prevention of Vice Law ’, which includes provisions that explicitly criminalise same-sex sexual conduct. Article 22(3) criminalises same-sex relationships between women ( ‘sahaq’ ), and Article 22(4) criminalises same-sex relationships between men ( ‘lawatat .’). Article 24(7) gives enforcers the power to impose any punishment that they consider appropriate, in addition to a fine and detention in a public prison. 2021 The legal situation following the takeover of the Taliban in 2021 for LGBT people remained uncertain, but reports at the time suggested that a strict interpretation of Sharia law was being implemented, under which same-sex sexual activity was punishable by death. In July, media reports showed a Taliban judge stating that gay men will be subjected to death by stoning or crushing under strict Sharia law imposed by the Taliban. Following the eventual takeover by the Taliban in August, fears of increased criminalisation and persecution of the LGBT community have been shared , with queer people reportedly fleeing the country and going underground, and countries being urged to accept LGBT refugees. “For homosexuals, there can only be two punishments: either stoning, or he must stand behind a wall that will fall down on him.” Taliban Judge, July 2021 2017 Afghanistan’s new Penal Code 2017 came into force on 14 February 2018, explicitly criminalising same-sex activity between both men and women. Previously Article 427 of the 1976 Penal Code had imposed “long imprisonment” for ‘pederasty’ (encompassing same-sex intimacy). Criminal Provisions The Propagation of Virtue and Prevention of Vice Law 2024, Article 22(3) Sahaq Article 22(3) criminalises same-sex sexual intimacy between women. The Propagation of Virtue and Prevention of Vice Law 2024, Article 22(4) Lawatat Article 22(4) criminalises anal sex. Penal Code 2017, Section 645 Musahaqah Section 645 criminalises same-sex intimacy between women with imprisonment for up to one year. Penal Code 2017, Section 646 Sodomy Section 646 criminalises ‘sodomy’, punishable with imprisonment for up to two years under section 647. Penal Code 2017, Section 649 Tafkhez Section 649 criminalises same-sex intimacy between men absent penetration, punishable with imprisonment of between three months and one year. Penal Code 2017, Section 650 Pimping Section 650 criminalises inciting two or more people to commit ‘sodomy’ by introducing them to each other and finding them a place to do so. Sharia Law Article 130 of the Constitution allows for the implementation of Sharia law which prohibits same-sex sexual activity in general. The maximum penalty is death and is applicable in cases of sex between men or between women. Enforcement 2025 According to media reports , an Afghan woman and her trans friend, both members of the LGBT community, have been arrested in Kabul by Taliban officials after attempting to board a plane and flee the country. At the time of writing there were considerable concerns for their safety. 2024 There have been numerous reports throughout 2024 of persons being convicted of “sodomy” or “homosexual acts”, who were subsequently flogged in public ahead of their prison sentences. 2023 The US Department of State report for 2023 noted that same-sex activity was criminalised and the Taliban “routinely enforced this position through violence, intimidation, harassment, and killings.” Outright International undertook research which suggested that the Taliban had begun pursuing LGBT people, especially gay men, more systematically after the first few months of rule, subjecting them to arbitrary detention and public flogging. Interviewees stated that at least 38 LGBT people had been detained, assaulted, or even killed. 2022 In October it was reported that a gay man had been executed by the Taliban because of his sexual orientation. Hamed Sabouri was reportedly kidnapped by the Taliban and a video showing his murder sent to his family days later. In November it was reported that 9 men and 3 women were publicly lashed for committing “sodomy, adultery, and theft”. Each of the individuals received between 21 and 39 lashes. Close to 5,000 people gathered at a local stadium to witness the punishment. 2021 In August, a report circulated of a gay man being raped, assaulted and outed to his family by the Taliban. 2020 The US Department of State report for 2020 states that LGBT individuals continued to face arrest by security forces, as well as discrimination, assault, and rape. This has consistently been found in recent iterations of this report. 2016 The US Department of State report for 2016 stated that NGOs reported police arrested, detained, robbed, and raped gay men in the year. 2015 It was reported by ILGA World that a parallel justice court sentenced three gay men (including one 17-year-old) to execution by “wall-toppling”. The 17-year-old survived and was allowed to live. 2013 The UK Country of Origin report on Afghanistan indicated that the death penalty had not been applied since the end of Taliban rule. In March, an English language Afghan news source, Khaama Press, provided statistics on the number of gay men prosecuted during the year, provided by Major General Zahir Zahir, the Commander of Kabul City Police and one-time recipient of a EUPOL Best Practice Award. According to the General, Afghan police forces arrested 97 individuals in relation to homosexuality. It is not immediately evident whether this statistic comes from the country at large, or Kabul city alone. Discrimination and Violence 2024 Amnesty International’s 2024 report on Afghanistan notes that “LGBTI people continued to face discrimination and other human rights violations, including threats and arbitrary detention.” 2023 The US Department of State report for 2023 highlighted that: “LGBTQI+ persons faced increased threats, attacks, sexual assaults, and discrimination from Taliban members, strangers, neighbors, and family members. In a video interview broadcast on Radio Free Europe/Radio Liberty on August 30, a member of the LGBTQI+ community, age 19, said he had to quit school to protect his identity and the Taliban arrested and beat him and his boyfriend on two occasions. A separate interview recounted the story of four Taliban security personnel gang-raping a gay man, age 20, while holding him in custody.” It also noted challenges in seeking healthcare and in maintaining jobs, as well as for organisations assisting LGBT people seeking resettlement. In February, members of the Behesht Collective, an LGBTQI+ group, protested from a private residence against the Taliban’s treatment of LGBTQI+ persons. The participants in the protest fled the country immediately afterwards to protect themselves, saying they were residing in a Muslim country that criminalised same-sex activity, but was still better than Afghanistan. A report released by Outright International documented accounts of violence, abuse, and torture of LGBT people, as well as a failure by the international community to pressure the Taliban regime to protect the rights of LGBT people. 2022 The FCDO’s Human Rights and Democracy report noted that LGBT people “continued to face widespread human rights violations and abuses.” In January, a report by Human Rights Watch and Outright International found that the situation for LGBT people in Afghanistan had dramatically worsened since the Taliban takeover in 2021. The report documents a sharp increase in discrimination, violence and murder committed against LGBT people, with many having fled or entered hiding. The report included interviews with LGBT Afghanis who had been subjected to beatings, mob attacks and rape. 2021 A submission to the UN SOGI Expert by All Survivors Project documented widespread discrimination against LGBT people in Afghanistan, including rape and sexual abuse of men and boys, especially in the context of armed conflict. Those subject to abuse are often labelled as gay, whether they identify as such or not, which has serious consequences in a country where same-sex activity is criminalised. Reporting of these crimes is rare due to fear of further discrimination and abuse by police, and similar concerns exist around seeking medical assistance. 2020 The US Department of State report states that in 2020 “there were reports of harassment and violence of LGBTI individuals by society and police. Homosexuality was widely seen as taboo and indecent. LGBTI individuals did not have access to certain health-care services and could be fired from their jobs because of their sexual orientation. Organizations devoted to protecting the freedom of LGBTI persons remained underground because they could not legally register with the government.” Furthermore, the report notes the case of Saboor Husaini, a transgender activist and artist who died in a Herat hospital after being beaten by an unidentified group of men in December. 2019 It was reported by ILGA World that “LGBT people face significant violence and discrimination from the State, their own families, and society at large. However, there is sparse evidence, anecdote and data being reported on the situations of sexual and gender minorities in the country, and there are no SOGI advocacy organisations or networks known of.” 2016 The BBC reported on the experiences of four Afghans who belonged to the LGBT community. All four reported hiding their identities for fear of reprisal and even death. One interviewee stated, “In Afghanistan, being lesbian is seen as un-Islamic. If people found out, the result would be death.” 2013 Whilst persecution and discrimination has been recognised by a number of bodies, there is a particular problem of underreporting. The UN High Commissioner for Refugees has issued guidance on this issue: “Given the pervading social taboos related to same-sex relations, there is little information available on the treatment of LGBTI individuals in Afghanistan. What little information there is pertains to gay men and male transvestites; the situation of lesbians, and that of bisexual, transgender or intersex individuals is largely undocumented. The absence of information should not be taken to mean that there is no risk for LGBTI individuals.” In January, local media outlet Khaama Press reported that a gay man from Afghanistan was granted asylum in Denmark on account of the ‘high risk of persecution’ he would face, were he to return to his home country. A similar decision was reached by the UK Asylum and immigration tribunal. References 1. The Propagation of Virtue and Prevention of Vice Law 2024, Article 22(3) Sahaq “An enforcer is duty-bound to prevent the following individual, wrongful acts…(3) Lesbianism.” (Afghanistan Analysts Network translation) 2. The Propagation of Virtue and Prevention of Vice Law 2024, Article 22(4) Lawatat “An enforcer is duty-bound to prevent the following individual, wrongful acts…(4) Anal sex, even if it is with one’s own wife.” (Afghanistan Analysts Network translation) 3. Penal Code 2017, Section 645 Mosahiqah or Tafkhez If a person commits Mosahiqah or Tafkhez with another person, each of the perpetrators shall be sentenced to short imprisonment ( Afghanistan Ministry of Justice translation ). 4. Penal Code 2017, Section 646 Crime of Sodomy “(1) A person who commits sodomy with another man or woman, shall be punished according to the provisions of this chapter. (2) For the purpose of this article, sodomy is deemed committed when there is penetration however slight in the anus of another man or woman.” Section 647, Punishment for Sodomy: “The perpetrators of the crime of sodomy shall be sentenced to medium imprisonment of up to two years.” Section 648, Aggravating Circumstances in the Crime of Sodomy: “Commission of sodomy shall be considered aggravating in the following circumstances and the perpetrator shall be sentenced to medium imprisonment of more than two years: (1) If the other participant of the crime of sodomy is a permanent or temporary Mahram of the perpetrator; (2) If the perpetrator is the instructor, teacher, superior or in one way or other has influence or dominance over the other participant; (3) If any of the perpetrators as a result of concealment of genital disease by the other participant in commission of sodomy is infected with sexual disease.” ( Afghanistan Ministry of Justice translation ). 5. Penal Code 2017, Section 649 Tafkhez “If a man commits Tafkez with another man, they shall be sentenced to short imprisonment.” ( Afghanistan Ministry of Justice translation ). 6. Penal Code 2017, Section 650 Pimping “(1) Pimping is to facilitate the process of Zina and Sodoomy between two or more persons through mediation, or providing place for this purpose. In pimping repetition of act is not a required condition.” (2) The perpetrator of the crime of pimping shall be sentenced in accordance to provisions of this chapter.” Article 651, Punishment of Pimping: “If the victim is a child the perpetrator shall be sentenced in accordance to provisions of the rape chapter stated in this part.” ( Afghanistan Ministry of Justice translation ). 7. Constitution of Afghanistan 2004, Article 130 “In cases under consideration, the courts shall apply provisions of this Constitution as well as other laws. If there is no provision in the Constitution or other laws about a case, the courts shall, in pursuance of Hanafi jurisprudence, and, within the limits set by this Constitution, rule in a way that attains justice in the best manner.” Full text . Local Organisations Rainbow Afghanistan a Berlin-based non-profit organization established to defend the rights, dignity, and lives of members of Afghanistan’s LGBTIQ+ community. Related Countries Turkmenistan Turkmenistan criminalises same-sex sexual activity between men. Sentences include a maximum penalty of two years’ imprisonment. Iran Iran criminalises same-sex sexual activity between men and between women. Sentences include a maximum penalty of death. Pakistan Pakistan criminalises same-sex sexual activity between men. Sentences include a maximum penalty of ten years’ imprisonment and a fine. Disclaimer The country profiles on the Human Dignity Trust’s website are developed through a combination of in-house expertise and research, including monitoring media reports; sourcing reports from partners and stakeholders; and reviewing reports from governments and other human rights organisations. We go to great lengths to ensure that, to the best of our knowledge, the information provided on our website is correct and up to date. If you believe that any information on our website is inaccurate, you may bring this to our attention by e-mailing [email protected] . Information on this website is provided for general use only and should not be relied on as a definitive position on the law as it applies at any given time. No liability can be accepted for any use of the information in this website and/or links from it. Support our Work Over 60 countries still criminalise LGBT people. Together, we can bring this number down. A donation today will help continue our vital support for LGBT people and governments seeking to change laws around the world. Donate Further Information Joint Statement on Afghanistan: Protect Women, Children, LGBTIQ & Other Vulnerable Persons Urges countries to open borders and accept refugees and asylum seekers Next Steps Towards Reform: Assessing good practice and gaps in Commonwealth sexual offences legislation in Asia This report examines the status of sexual offences legislation in Commonwealth Asia, assessing good practice and identifying where there are gaps in protection, with a particular focus on women, children, LGBT+ people and people with disability. Changing Laws, Changing Lives – HDT secures renewed UK funding for acclaimed work helping governments eradicate archaic laws The Trust will provide technical legal & communications assistance to Commonwealth governments Sign up to receive updates Join our newsletter to receive regular updates about decriminalisation efforts around the world, including breaking news on key legal cases, hot off the press reports, invitations to events and messages from our Chief Executive. SIGN UP We use the law to defend the human rights of LGBT people globally. Twitter Facebook Instagram Human Dignity Trust, 4th Floor West - Quality House 5-9 Quality Court, Chancery Lane, London WC2A 1HP, United Kingdom Copyright © 2026 . All Rights Reserved. Registered charity in England and Wales (No. 1158093) Charity web design by Fat Beehive Sitemap Accessibility Privacy Notice & Cookies Policy Home LGBT people & the law What We Do Who We Are Support Us Resources Donate Make a one time donation LinkedIn This field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged. Single Donation This form will create a one time donation of Title - select - Mr Mrs Miss Ms Mx Dr Rev Name * First Last Address Line 1 * Address Line 2 Town / City * Postcode * Country Email * Email Confirm Email Phone Gift Aid opt-in I am a UK taxpayer. Please enable Gift Aid on my donation Consent * I agree to the privacy policy . I have read and understood the Human Dignity Trust's policy on how my information is used (link opens in a new tab/window) Keep in touch Yes, I would like to receive news from the Human Dignity Trust about how my donation is making a difference. Submit CLOSE Make a monthly donation by subscription Monthly Donation This form will create a monthly subscription of Title - select - Mr Mrs Miss Ms Mx Dr Rev Name * First Last Address Line 1 * Address Line 2 Town / City * Postcode * Country Email * Email Confirm Email Phone Gift Aid opt-in I am a UK taxpayer. Please enable Gift Aid on my donation Consent * I agree to the privacy policy . I have read and understood the Human Dignity Trust's policy on how my information is used (link opens in a new tab/window) Keep in touch Yes, I would like to receive news from the Human Dignity Trust about how my donation is making a difference. Submit CLOSE Make a one time donation Facebook This field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged. Single Donation This form will create a one-off donation of Title - select - Mr Mrs Miss Ms Mx Dr Rev Name * First Last Address Line 1 * Address Line 2 Town / City * Postcode * Country Email * Enter Email Confirm Email Phone Gift Aid opt-in I am a UK taxpayer. Please enable Gift Aid on my donation Consent * I agree to the privacy policy . I have read and understood the Human Dignity Trust's policy on how my information is used (link opens in a new tab/window) Keep in touch I would like to receive news from the Human Dignity Trust about how my donation is making a difference. Submit CLOSE Make a monthly donation by subscription URL This field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged. Monthly Donation This form will create a monthly subscription of Title - select - Mr Mrs Miss Ms Mx Dr Rev Name * First Last Address Line 1 * Address Line 2 Town / City * Postcode * Country Email * Email Confirm Email Phone Gift Aid opt-in I am a UK taxpayer. Please enable Gift Aid on my donation Consent * I agree to the privacy policy . I have read and understood the Human Dignity Trust's policy on how my information is used (link opens in a new tab/window) Keep in touch Yes, I would like to receive news from the Human Dignity Trust about how my donation is making a difference. Submit CLOSE