Papua New Guinea's gay and transgender community finds safety in Hanuabada village - ABC News Skip to main content Skip to news navigation, settings and search Explore the ABC More from ABC Close menu ABC ABC News ABC iview ABC listen Kids & Students Indigenous Information & Services Editorial Policies Read our editorial guiding principles Follow the ABC news iview listen Loading ABC News Just In For You Politics World Business Analysis Sport Lifestyle Entertainment Quizzes More Search News Home Just In For You Analysis Rural Watch Live Health Indigenous Politics Science Deep Time Elections World Environment Investigations Business Local news Quizzes Sport AFL NRL Football Tennis Cricket Netball Lifestyle Wellbeing Relationships & Family Food & Recipes Personal Finance Home & Garden Entertainment TV & Movies Books Music Pop Culture Arts Facebook YouTube Instagram Twitter Emergency Backstory Newsletters 中文新闻 BERITA BAHASA INDONESIA TOK PISIN Appearance (BETA) Follow system settings Select an option Always light Always dark Follow system settings ABC iView ABC Listen ABC News News Home Papua New Guinea's gay and transgender community finds safety in Hanuabada village Share Share article Papua New Guinea's gay and transgender community finds safety in Hanuabada village By Natalie Tencic Topic: LGBTQIA+ Posted Wed 8 Oct 2014 at 10:57am Wed 8 Oct 2014 at 10:57am Wed 8 Oct 2014 at 10:57am , updated Wed 8 Oct 2014 at 2:51pm Wed 8 Oct 2014 at 2:51pm Wed 8 Oct 2014 at 2:51pm Four men dressed as women pose at a nightclub dressing room in Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea, photo undated. ( Vlad Sokhin/Panos Pictures ) abc.net.au/news/living-gay-in-papua-new-guinea/5796236 Link copied Share Share article The sleepy coastal village of Hanuabada sits on the north western outskirts of Papua New Guinea's capital, Port Moresby, and is probably best known for producing half of PNG's national cricket team. What it is less known for is being a safe haven for Port Moresby's gay and transgender community. Homosexuality is illegal in Papua New Guinea, punishable by up to 14 years in prison, but actual prosecutions are not common, and the laws are rarely enforced. Instead, it is the hate crimes, violence and discrimination incited by the law that puts gay and transgender Papua New Guineans at risk. Gay men walking the streets of Port Moresby are often targeted by local men, particularly those who hail from PNG's highland provinces, and have been raped, beaten and even murdered. But in Hanuabada, things are different. Documentary filmmaker and photographer Vlad Sokhin noticed this when he stumbled on the village during his travels. "[It's] probably the only place in Port Moresby where they feel safe and many of them, they were born in different places so they moved to Hanuabada village because they are accepted by the local community there," Vlad said. As he and his co-producer Roman Kalyakin got to know the gay and transgender people of Hanuabada, he learned that it was a safe space where people live openly, without fear of retaliation from locals. "You can see many of them walking in the streets in Hanuabada and they, transgender people, they don't hide, they can wear women's clothes there," he said. "Kids still chase them and call them names but at least they don't experience physical violence in the village which is quite common in Port Moresby. "I heard about many cases where gay and transgender people were raped or were beaten and sometimes it was even by the police, so they feel safe in Hanuabada." "Speedy" kisses another man by the Hanuabada shoreline. ( Vlad Sokhin/Panos Pictures ) About 30 gay men, or 'Gelegele' in the local tongue, permanently live in the village, while others drift in and out. In Papua New Guinea, the Gelegele tend to take traditionally female roles in society. They do the cooking, wash clothes and participate on the women's side in cultural rituals and traditional festivals. One of the Gelegele featured in Vlad's documentary film Guavas and Bananas: Living Gay in PNG, is Haraga, known to locals as 'Speedy'. Speedy has lived in Hanubada village for 22 years, moving there at the age of 15. He says over that time, the village has changed from a place that would broach him with hostility to one where he commands respect. "It's OK in the village now, not like before. Before when [men in the village would] see us they used to hurt us or beat us, but nowadays, change is happened," he said. "Boys can understand the situation here so that's OK now, and also they're likely to come and hear what's happening in the village. "When they see us they say 'ah, Gelegele' that's it. When they grow a bit bigger, 13 or 14, when they are used to us, they respect us, so that's how the village is nowadays." 'Straight' men seek gay sex Hanuabada is a known homosexual hub amongst locals, with many 'straight' or bisexual men and boys travelling to the village seeking sex with the men there. Vlad says some teenage boys come to gay men seeking their first sexual experience because they are too shy to approach girls. Openly gay PNG musician Moses Tau said in the documentary, that in PNG, most gay men go with straight or bisexual men. "I don't know the ideas of how or why they want to do it, could be maybe they say 'just try'," Tau said. Speedy talks of his straight lover, who visits him in Hanuabada regularly. "He has a girlfriend, but he doesn't enjoy [sex with her]," Speedy said. "He has sex with me and he enjoys it to the fullest, so as for me, when I'm with a straight guy and a straight guy is with me we both love each other. "Nowadays most of the people understand the situation." Though locals call these men straight, Speedy says he has no doubt that there is a huge number of closeted gays in the capital. Mike "Marbelline" from Hanuabada dances with a man during a gay night party in Port Moresby. 'Straight' men often go to gay club nights to meet Gelegele. ( Vlad Sokhin/Panos Pictures ) Violence and stigma in the capital Some of Port Moresby's nightclubs hold gay nights, attended by both Gelegele, often dressed in women's clothing, and straight or bisexual men from the capital. Speedy says leaving the safety of the village to attend these nights is always a risk. "When we are out of the village, going out clubbing, after the parties, when we're stranded of transport it's a risk," he said. "Most of [my friends] are hurt and killed because of what they are doing here in Papua New Guinea." Speedy says the 'straight' guys they meet at the clubs, some of whom go back to Hanuabada with them after a wild night, never defend them. "The boys don't protect us, they used to tell us, 'you're man enough, protect yourselves'," he said. "When you're in public like, they have to be strong person, strong guy. When we're in the club, well, it's a gay club so we have to act like a gay, but when we are outside of the club we have to be a strong guy to protect ourselves." Loading Vimeo content Film changing hearts and minds The documentary Guavas and Bananas: Living Gay in PNG has been screening as part of the fifth PNG Human Rights Film Festival. The festival tours around the country, from big cities to tiny villages, screening films addressing human rights issues in Papua New Guinea and the Pacific. Discussion panels are held between screenings, with viewers encouraged to discuss the films. Vlad's documentary has been somewhat controversial, but from what he saw on the festival's social media pages, it seems to be changing some hearts and minds. "So far, I heard already really positive feedback in Port Moresby and on the Facebook page of the festival they posted a photo of a man who they interviewed and he said before he didn't really appreciate, he didn't like transgender and gay people but after seeing the film, he changed his opinion," Vlad said. "So I think we should talk about these things, we should talk more openly, I know this is still a taboo in Papua New Guinean society but the more we talk about it, it would change things I think. "People talk about these things, people see my work or people see work of other photographers and videographers, things are moving and I'm happy to be a part of it." Vlad said some people were wary of exposing themselves on camera, but the culture of openness in Hanuabada has given many the confidence to speak out. "Some of them, they didn't really want to share this story but people that I interviewed for this film, in Hanuabada village, they were really open and they said for many years they had been trying to hide who they are but it's time to open up so most of them, now they want to speak," he said. "They want to change the law and they want that they would be respected and treated equally with the other citizens of Papua New Guinea." Speedy says he is delighted to see his story on the big screen. "I love that kind of video, or something that can change people in PNG," he said. "I want Papua New Guinea government to make something for gay people in Papua New Guinea so we can move freely in PNG, let us free, give us freedom to live free and move freely." Share options Copy link Facebook X (formerly Twitter) See more ABC coverage in your search results Make ABC a preferred source in Google Top Stories Rinehart allegedly tried to help recruit Liberal MP to join One Nation Topic: One Nation Men accused of planning terrorist attack at RAF base used to strike Iran Topic: Terrorism Banks cut rewards programs, free travel insurance amid surcharge ban Topic: Banking Migration cuts, AI and rising interest rates mean an era of long-term disinflation A Analysis by Alan Kohler Hundreds of Russian hybrid attacks serve to 'wake everyone up' in NATO Topic: Surveillance Related stories Pacific AIDS survivors need psychological support Topic: Community and Society Punitive laws undermining HIV efforts in Pacific Topic: Health Related topics Homicide LGBTQIA+ Laws Pacific Papua New Guinea Top Stories Rinehart allegedly tried to help recruit Liberal MP to join One Nation Topic: One Nation Men accused of planning terrorist attack at RAF base used to strike Iran Topic: Terrorism Banks cut rewards programs, free travel insurance amid surcharge ban Topic: Banking Migration cuts, AI and rising interest rates mean an era of long-term disinflation A Analysis by Alan Kohler Hundreds of Russian hybrid attacks serve to 'wake everyone up' in NATO Topic: Surveillance Just In Young Arrernte boxer sets sights on Olympics after AIS opportunity Topic: Boxing Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:07am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:07am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:07am Treasurer to unveil $6 billion improvement to federal budget LIVE Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:02am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:02am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:02am Wall Street closes higher, ASX lacks direction ahead of rates decision LIVE Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:59am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:59am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:59am Police launch murder probe after death west of Brisbane Topic: Homicide Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:57am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:57am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:57am More Just In Back to top ABC News Contact ABC News Your home of Australian stories, conversations and events that shape our nation. This service may include material from Agence France-Presse (AFP), APTN, Reuters, AAP, CNN and the BBC World Service which is copyright and cannot be reproduced. Follow ABC News Sections ABC News Home Just In For You Watch Live News Live ABC NewsRadio Politics Elections Australia World Sport Live Sport Rural Business Analysis Science Health Lifestyle Entertainment Quizzes More Topics News in Language Chinese 中文 Tok Pisin Berita Bahasa Indonesia Related ABC News app Local News ABC Emergency ABC Indigenous ABC Religion & Ethics ABC Asia ABC Pacific Music & Audio ABC Listen Home triple j Live Radio Movies & TV ABC iview Home List of ABC Shows Live TV TV Guide Kids & Students BTN Education Heywire Takeover ABC Kids Get the ABC News AM newsletter Get the latest ABC News delivered to your email inbox Email address Subscribe Your information is being handled in accordance with the ABC Privacy Collection Statement . All ABC newsletters Stay informed and connected with the ABC. Covering a wide range of topics and brands including News, iview, listen, and more. Browse all ABC newsletters ABC home Information & Services Editorial Policies Accessibility Help Contact Us Commercial Careers About the ABC Privacy Policy Terms of Use © 2026 ABC Follow the ABC We acknowledge Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the First Australians and Traditional Custodians of the lands where we live, learn and work.