Acquittals overturned, new trial ordered for preacher who led anti-drag protest | CBC News Skip to Main Content Accessibility Help Menu Menu Television CBC Gem headphone CBC Listen Search Search Sign In Quick Links News Sports Radio Music Listen Live TV Watch news Top Stories Local Climate World Canada Politics Indigenous Business The National Health Entertainment Science CBC News Investigates Disability Life Go Public About CBC News Being Black in Canada More Acquittals overturned, new trial ordered for preacher who led anti-drag protest | CBC News Loaded Calgary Acquittals overturned, new trial ordered for preacher who led anti-drag protest A Calgary judge has ordered a new trial for a pastor who was originally acquitted on charges of causing a disturbance and mischief stemming from one of his anti-drag protests. Derek Reimer was convicted of criminal harassment and 4 breaches of his bail conditions last year Meghan Grant · CBC News · Posted: Jul 09, 2025 3:52 PM EDT | Last Updated: July 9, 2025 Play Listen to this article Estimated 4 minutes The audio version of this article is generated by AI-based technology. Mispronunciations can occur. We are working with our partners to continually review and improve the results. This week, Derek Reimer was found guilty of breaching the conditions of his house arrest by attending a protest 90 minutes before he was due in court. He was released on a time-served sentence after spending two months behind bars. (Derek Reimer/Facebook ) Social Sharing A Calgary judge has ordered a new trial for a pastor who was originally acquitted on charges of causing a disturbance and mischief stemming from one of his anti-drag protests. The ruling comes one day after Derek Reimer, 38, was released following a two-month stint in the Calgary Remand Centre where he was held after his arrest for breaching his conditional sentence order (CSO) by protesting on the courthouse steps earlier this year despite being on house arrest. The CSO was imposed in December after Reimer was convicted of harassing a librarian related to her branch's hosting of a drag reading event. On Tuesday, Justice Brandy Shaw of Alberta's provincial court found that Reimer breached his CSO but released him on a time-served sentence. Calgary pastor known for library drag protests is back in jail after courthouse rally In the spring of 2023, Reimer faced several sets of charges after he was arrested three times in five weeks while protesting Reading With Royalty events hosted at Calgary Public Library branches across the city. The events involved drag queens reading stories to children. Reimer and his supporters call the drag queens "perverts" and described the events as "pervert grooming sessions" that are "wrong and evil." Reimer was convicted on two sets of charges, including criminal harassment, but was acquitted by Justice Allan Fradsham of the provincial court on charges of mischief and causing a disturbance connected to an incident at the Seton Library on February 25, 2023. 'Your call for action turned on you,' says judge in rejecting appeal of convicted pastor That day, Reimer entered the reading room, yelling and hurling insults at drag performers before he was physically thrown out of the room by some of the adult attendees. Fradsham ruled that while Reimer's actions were "inconsiderate and disrespectful … they did not cross the line into criminal acts. The judge found that the operation of the Seton branch "continued unabated" after Reimer left. Calgary pastor not guilty of mischief, causing disturbance at library drag events Prosecutors appealed that ruling and on Wednesday, Court of King's Bench Justice Nancy Carruthers overturned the acquittals. Carruthers found that the trial judge erred when he focused on the impact Reimer's behaviour had on the library's operation rather than on the people participating in the event. In a statement provided to CBC News, Reimer's lawyer Andrew MacKenzie said said the overturning of a summary conviction acquittal is "extremely rare" and called the decision "troubling." "Justice Fradsham's legal reasoning on the law of disturbance and mischief has been followed in seven provinces and over 30 written decisions," said MacKenzie. "His legal expertise should be given deference and this may give rise to a further appeal." A date for a new trial has not yet been set. Criminal history After Fradsham's acquittals, Justice Karen Molle of the provincial court convicted and sentenced Reimer for harassing the Saddletown librarian on March 27, 2023. Reimer appealed his convictions but lost. Last October, Reimer was found guilty of breach charges stemming from his protests. For those convictions, he was fined $500. The pastor has a history with the justice system in both Alberta and Manitoba with convictions including animal abuse and aggravated assault. In 2015, Reimer was handed 12 months probation after a Calgary judge found him guilty of causing suffering to a dog. Between 2011 and 2013 in Winnipeg, Reimer was convicted of two counts of aggravated assault and assault causing bodily harm. ABOUT THE AUTHOR Meghan Grant CBC Calgary crime reporter Meghan Grant is a justice affairs reporter. She has been covering courts, crime and stories of police accountability in southern Alberta for more than a decade. Send Meghan a story tip at meghan.grant@cbc.ca. CBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices · About CBC News Corrections and clarifications · Submit a news tip · Report error Related Stories Top stories from CBC Calgary Former Alberta teacher facing 16 sexual assault, exploitation charges: RCMP 3 people stabbed in serious assault at Calgary Stampede: police Calgary money launderer admits to funnelling $800k to leader of organized crime syndicate Footer Links My Account Profile CBC Gem Newsletters About CBC Accounts Connect with CBC Facebook X YouTube Instagram Mobile RSS Podcasts Contact CBC Submit Feedback Help Centre Audience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON Canada, M5W 1E6 Toll-free (Canada only): 1-866-306-4636 About CBC Corporate Info Sitemap Reuse & Permission Terms of Use Privacy Notice Privacy Preferences Jobs Our Unions Independent Producers Political Ads Registry AdChoices Services Ombudsman Corrections and Clarifications Public Appearances Commercial Services CBC Shop Doing Business with Us Renting Facilities Radio Canada International CBC Lite Accessibility It is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges. Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem . About CBC Accessibility Accessibility Feedback © 2026 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved. Visitez Radio-Canada.ca