Mr Gay World cancels Hong Kong event citing concerns over LGBTQ crackdown in mainland | Hong Kong Free Press HKFP Close WEATHER SUPPORT HKFP Sign In Search for: Search ABOUT SUPPORT FEATURES REGIONS Open dropdown menu China Hong Kong Macau Taiwan World NEWSLETTER MONITOR TOPICS Open dropdown menu 2014 Umbrella Movement 2019 Protests 2023 District Council Election 2025 Policy Address 2025 Legislative Election 47 Democrats Trial Covid-19 Climate Crisis Election Overhaul Jimmy Lai Trial John Lee National Security Press Freedom & Censorship Stand News trial Tiananmen Trial Xi Jinping SECTIONS Open dropdown menu Animals Arts & Lifestyle Business Community & Education Domestic Workers Environment & Health HKFP Features Interviews Law & Crime LGBTQ & Gender Politics & Protest Science & Technology Sport Travel & Transport Weather PROJECTS Open dropdown menu 2019 HKU Protest Archive Covid Children’s Book Climate Photo Project Hong Kong Humans Hong Kong Originals Hong Kong’s Zine Scene History Museum Archive Monthly Security Law Log Partners in Pride Place Names Series Press Freedom Timeline Shifting Narratives OPINION LENS About Open dropdown menu About HKFP Advertise with HKFP Annual Report Announcements Awards Careers Community Guidelines Documentary Editor’s Blog Free from GenAI Freelancer Charter Policies, Ethics & Best Practices Privacy, T’s & C’s Store Staff Support HKFP The Journalism Trust Initiative The Trust Project Transparency Report Advertise Contact Ethics Licensing Annual Report Transparency Apps Store Support us Facebook X Instagram Threads LinkedIn Bluesky YouTube Telegram RSS Close Search for: Search August 2018 M T W T F S S 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 « Jul Sep » Categories Animals Arts, Lifestyle & Events Business China Community & Education Defence & Foreign Policy Domestic Workers Environment & Health Hide HKFP Announcements HKFP Buzz HKFP Features HKFP Lens HKFP Reports HKFP Venture HKFP Voices Hong Kong Humour & Satire Interviews Law & Crime LGBTQ & Gender Macau Opinion Paid Content Politics & Protest Science & Technology Sport Taiwan TOP-LEVEL CAT (Pick 1) TOPICS (Pick 1-3) Travel & Transport Urban Exploring Video World Skip to content SEARCH About Open dropdown menu About HKFP Advertise with HKFP Annual Report Announcements Awards Careers Community Guidelines Documentary Editor’s Blog Free from GenAI Freelancer Charter Policies, Ethics & Best Practices Privacy, T’s & C’s Store Staff Support HKFP The Journalism Trust Initiative The Trust Project Transparency Report Advertise Contact Ethics Licensing Annual Report Transparency Apps Store Support us Facebook X Instagram Threads LinkedIn Bluesky YouTube Telegram RSS Hong Kong Free Press HKFP Hong Kong news, breaking updates – 100% Independent, impartial, non-profit WEATHER SUPPORT HKFP Sign In Open Search Search for: Search Support us Menu Sign In ABOUT SUPPORT FEATURES REGIONS Open dropdown menu China Hong Kong Macau Taiwan World NEWSLETTER MONITOR TOPICS Open dropdown menu 2014 Umbrella Movement 2019 Protests 2023 District Council Election 2025 Policy Address 2025 Legislative Election 47 Democrats Trial Covid-19 Climate Crisis Election Overhaul Jimmy Lai Trial John Lee National Security Press Freedom & Censorship Stand News trial Tiananmen Trial Xi Jinping SECTIONS Open dropdown menu Animals Arts & Lifestyle Business Community & Education Domestic Workers Environment & Health HKFP Features Interviews Law & Crime LGBTQ & Gender Politics & Protest Science & Technology Sport Travel & Transport Weather PROJECTS Open dropdown menu 2019 HKU Protest Archive Covid Children’s Book Climate Photo Project Hong Kong Humans Hong Kong Originals Hong Kong’s Zine Scene History Museum Archive Monthly Security Law Log Partners in Pride Place Names Series Press Freedom Timeline Shifting Narratives OPINION LENS New Tiananmen Trial Tai Po Fire National Security HK Originals Partners in Pride Jimmy Lai Trial LGBTQ+ 2019 Demos Press Freedom Posted in Hong Kong Mr Gay World cancels Hong Kong event citing concerns over LGBTQ crackdown in mainland by Holmes Chan 18:10, 20 August 2018 Updated 22:17, 31 March 2020 Why you can trust Hong Kong Free Press HKFP Mr Gay World – an international contest for gay men – has cancelled its 2019 Hong Kong event owing to “a clampdown by Chinese authorities on LGBTQ affirming events and campaigns.” The organisers said in a statement on Friday that the local hosting company, which is located in mainland China, said that it could not proceed with organising the contest. The event, set to be held from April 28 to May 4 2019, will instead move to Cape Town, South Africa. Photo: Mr Gay World “It is with great disappointment that I’ve been informed that Mr Gay World will not be able to go ahead in Hong Kong due to the struggles that our Chinese colleagues and their families are facing in their homeland,” said Eric Butter, president and founder of Mr Gay World. “The safety of our delegates and their families is of utmost importance,” he added. Igor Scheurkogel, board chair of Mr Gay World, told HKFP that he could not give an exact account of what happened to the hosting company, and declined to disclose the identities of people affected by the clampdown due to safety concerns. “The last communication received from the liaison between MGW and the organisers reads as follows: ‘The issue is that the Chinese authority is coming down hard on the company and has issued a warning that it stop promoting LGBT rights, activities (commercial or otherwise) in China,’” Scheurkogel said. Photo: Kris Cheng/HKFP. Scheurkogel said that Mr Gay World realised in early August that the hosting company stopped responding to emails and social media communication. ‘Long way to go’ Mr Gay World announced on June 22 that it had selected Hong Kong as its 2019 host. At the time, a statement noted that the decision was made “on the strength of [Hong Kong] being a popular destination for global supporters of the LGBTQ+ community.” However, the June statement also noted that the city had a long way to go, as same-sex marriage and civil unions are still not recognised. The statement also quoted Charles Sun, president of Yunqiaoshang, the local organising committee. “We were obviously quite excited at the news that Mr Gay World has chosen us as the host city,” Sun said. “We have many challenges in our country, especially when it comes to LGBTQ+ rights. But we are hoping that our government will see the financial benefits events like these have on our economy.” The current Mr Gay World, Jordan Bruno from Australia, said he was “disappointed” that the Chinese authorities were unwilling to celebrate and uphold LGBTQ equality. Organisers say the annual event seeks to find ambassadors for LGBTQ rights who embody the spirit of their nation. In 2015, Emmanuel Mass Luciano, Mr Gay Hong Kong, became Mr Gay World after the original winner stepped down seven months after being awarded the title. Hong Kong has also been chosen to host the Gay Games, a separate LGBTQ event, in 2022 . Safeguard press freedom; keep HKFP free for all readers by supporting our team Share using Native tools Share Copied to clipboard Share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Share on X (Opens in new window) X Share on Bluesky (Opens in new window) Bluesky Share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window) LinkedIn Share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) WhatsApp Share on Mail (Opens in new window) Mail Share on Print (Opens in new window) Print Support HKFP | Policies & Ethics | Error/typo? | Contact | Newsletter | Transparency & Annual Report | Apps Monthly HK$150 HK$250 HK$500 Other Donation amount per month HK$ per month Recurring donors unlock 8 benefits : Members get a free HKFP deer keyring or tote; ad-free browsing and no pop-ups; full access to HKFP Monitor , exclusive Tim Hamlett opinion columns; HKFP feature previews; 15% off all merch ; Editor’s Blogs ; and early access to our Annual/Transparency Report . Activate monthly membership Make a one-off donation . One-time Donation amount HK$ Make a donation to our newsroom of any sum (one-off donations do not unlock membership benefits.) Support HKFP Holmes Chan x Holmes Chan is a reporter at Hong Kong Free Press. He covers local news with a focus on law, politics, and social movements. He studied law and literature at the University of Hong Kong. More by Holmes Chan Donate to HKFP: Support our non-profit newsroom : safeguard HKFP's future, ensure our independence, help keep trusted local news free-to-access for all. 1. Donate by card or PayPal. Make a one-off or monthly contribution instantly online . Access eight benefits with a recurring donation. 2. Donate by cheque. Please make HK$ cheques payable to Hong Kong Free Press Limited and send to: Hong Kong Free Press, The Hive Kennedy Town, 6/F, Cheung Hing Industrial Building, 12P Smithfield Road, Kennedy Town, Hong Kong. [Please do not send cash.] Please include your name and address for accounting purposes. 3. Donate by HSBC PayMe. Scan our QR code. Please include your name and email in the ‘comment’ field for accounting purposes. 4. Donate by Octopus. Scan our QR code. 5. Donate via Patreon. Support us with a one-off or regular contribution by signing up at: patreon.com/HongKongFreePressHKFP . 6. Donate coins via Coin Dragon. Do you have a big jar or bag of coins at home? Contribute leftover 10c, 20c, 50c, HK$1, HK$2 and HK$5 coins to HKFP at Coin Dragon machines across the city. Just select Hong Kong Free Press from the list of non-profits. More ways to support independent media. Download our free apps: A proud member of: Subscribe to HKFP's newsletters HKFP Dim Sum Mondays: HKFP's best original reporting from the past week. HKFP Daily Digest 9pm Daily: Automated digest of all HKFP stories from the day. Sign up Check your email to confirm subscription. Unsubscribe at any time. HKFP will never share your details with third parties. About HKFP: Advertise with HKFP . Announcements . Anti-Harassment Policy . Awards . Careers . Contact HKFP . Community Guidelines . Corrections Policy . Corrections Log . Documentary on HKFP . Donor Support / FAQ . Deer Mascot . Freelance Charter . Human-powered Journalism . Mobile Apps . Newsletters . Newspaper Registration (periodical) . Policies, Ethics & Standards . Privacy, T&Cs . Support HKFP . Staff Roster . Transparency Report . Weather . Latest stories: Migrant domestic workers demand 21% wage hike to HK$6,172, reject calls for pay freeze Gov’t refutes animal activist’s claims over stray dog culling following fatal mauling Gov’t seeks heavier sentences for 4 people – including prison guard – convicted of wounding inmate Questioning Hong Kong’s lack of a banned book list is ‘soft resistance’ – outgoing nat. security police chief Hong Kong 47: Ex-district councillor says he has ‘no regrets’ after release from prison Sai Kung’s Po Pin Chau trail fully booked ahead of upcoming holidays, as Hong Kong expects 1.3m mainland visitors HKFP features: In Pictures: 30 years on, Pokémon fever brings Hong Kong hobbyists and world champs together In Pictures: Hong Kong sex work exhibition explores violence and bodily autonomy in an underground industry ‘Deed, not breed’: Owners and experts push back on stigma against ‘fighting dogs’ Tai Po fire: To sell or not to sell? As gov’t deadline looms, some owners still hope their homes can rise from the ashes More features Something went wrong. Please refresh the page and/or try again. Views expressed by opinion writers & advertisers are not necessarily shared by HKFP. Where to find HKFP: HKFP Platforms: HKFP Newsletter . HKFP Podcast . HKFP Feeds: HKFP Apple News . HKFP Bluesky . HKFP Facebook . HKFP Instagram . HKFP LinkedIn . HKFP Mastodon . HKFP Telegram . HKFP Threads . HKFP X/Twitter . HKFP YouTube . HKFP Apps: HKFP Android app . HKFP iOS app . HKFP Partnerships: Discount codes and offers from our partners. HKFP benefits if you buy or enrol. Facebook X Instagram Threads LinkedIn Bluesky YouTube Telegram RSS 25 Reasons to Support About HKFP Advertise with HKFP Annual Report Announcements Anti-Harassment Policy Awards Careers Community Guidelines Contact HKFP Corrections Policy Corrections Log Donor Benefits Documentary Freelance Charter Ethics, Policies, Standards Free from GenAI Licensing Mobile Apps Merch Store Newsletter Privacy, T’s & C’s Store Staff Support HKFP Transparency Report Weather Run by journalists , backed by readers and 100% independent , HKFP offers balanced coverage guided by a comprehensive Ethics Code and Corrections Policy . We are part of the Trust Project network , and are accredited by the Journalism Trust Initiative , recognising our professional commitment to accuracy and fairness. Proudly free of generative AI. Read more . © 2026 HKFP LTD Powered by Newspack Privacy, Terms, Conditions & FAQs Sign in or register Close Continue with Google Or Enter the code sent to your email Email address Enter your password Sign in by entering the code we sent to , or clicking the magic link in the email. Continue Resend code Email me a one-time code instead Forgot password Go back Continue Set a password (optional) Privacy Policy . This site is protected by reCAPTCHA and the Google Privacy Policy and Terms of Service apply. Verify your email Close We'll send a verification code to %EMAIL% . Send code Skip for now Sign up for newsletters Close Get the best of Hong Kong Free Press HKFP directly in your email inbox. Sending to: HKFP Dim Sum Mondays: HKFP's best original reporting from the past week. HKFP Daily Digest 9pm Daily: Automated digest of all HKFP stories from the day. Continue Gift this article Close Link Copy link Complete your transaction Close