8 in 10 Cambodian queer women and trans men emotionally abused by family About Us Advertise Work with us Login Register Latest News View all UK US World Health Politics Sport Business Culture View all TV Film Celebrity Drag Theatre Music Gaming Lifestyle View all Beauty Careers Fashion Relationships Travel Shopping View all Deals Recommended Fashion & Beauty Tickets Video View all News & Politics Entertainment Lifestyle Discover Trans Awareness Week Drag Race Explainers The Queer Agenda Toggle menu Account Register Login World 8 in 10 Cambodian queer women and trans men emotionally abused by family Jul 20 2019 Written by Lily Wakefield Share Save for later Comment 81 percent of young queer women and trans men in Cambodia suffer emotional violence by their families. 81 percent of queer women and transgender under 35 in Cambodia have suffered emotional abuse by a family member, a study by Rainbow Community Kampuchea (RoCK) has found. The organisation interviewed sixty-one LBGT+ people (23 lesbian women, 4 bisexual women and 34 trans men), as well as three parents of LBGT+ people, eight state officials, three UN staff members, three academics and three NGO staff members. 51 percent of the queer women and trans men surveyed were under 35 years old, and of all participants 56 percent had suffered emotional violence by their families. The violence reported by victims in the study at the hands of family members includes both physical and emotional violence, including having their liberty taken away, being completely disowned, physical beatings and forced marriages. 35 percent of participants under the age of 35 had considered suicide because of their family’s rejection of their sexuality or gender identity. (TANG CHHIN SOTHY/AFP/Getty) One participant in the study was forced into rehab to “fix his gender” One of the experiences quoted in the report is of Sam, a 27-year-old trans man. He said: “My mother always said horribly harsh things to me, such as ‘if I knew that you would become like this, I would have killed you when you were born.'” He was forced by his mother into a drug rehabilitation centre for the purpose of “fixing his gender,” but managed to run away after three months. The study also found that 35 percent of participants under the age of 35 had considered suicide “due to their family’s denial of their sexual orientation or gender identity and expression.” According to the report, the Cambodian population is approximately 90 percent Buddhist, and 10 percent Christian, Muslim and other religions. Coordinator of RoCK Ly Pisey said: “RoCK strongly requests government officials, national and international organisations, academic institutions, and development partners to continue to advocate for the rights of LBT people so that they can live free from prejudice, discrimination and violence.” Queer News. Straight Up. The LGBTQ+ stories you don’t want to miss, delivered to your inbox daily. Email address required Must be valid email Register By registering you agree to our Privacy Policy Thanks for registering! You can update your email subscriptions at any time in the My profile section of your account. Dec 01 2023 16 TV stars you grew up watching who later came out as LGBTQ+ Related articles Opinion Jan 28 ‘Trans women are no threat to cis women, so why is the public ready to believe they are?’ Trans Nov 21 2024 Three in four trans people killed in the US in past year were people of colour US Oct 15 2024 Queer women four times more likely to have attempted suicide, new study claims TV Apr 23 2024 I Kissed A Girl: Meet the 11 queer women looking for love on the BBC’s new lesbian dating series News Jan 21 2024 Study finds over 75 per cent of LGBTQ+ Australians face abuse from parents or other authority figures Latest News Previous Next Celebrity Sep 25 Trans influencer calls out Nikki Glaser for stand-up joke about what’s ‘in her pants’ Culture Sep 25 Trans pro wrestling trailblazer Gisele Shaw signs exclusive NWA contract Bisexual Sep 25 The Traitors star Freddie Fraser’s mum’s emotional response to his coming out Celebrity Sep 25 Lili Reinhart says Hollywood ‘too afraid’ to greenlight lesbian vampire project Celebrity Sep 25 Carly Rae Jepsen describes moment Heated Rivalry inspired her son’s name Celebrity Sep 25 John Green ‘heartbroken’ for trans Harry Potter fans as he talks JK Rowling Current Affairs Sep 25 JD Vance claims James Talarico has a “weird obsession with children in drag” News Sep 25 Susan Sarandon, Hannah Einbinder and Caleb Hearon detained outside UN after protesting Netanyahu What to buy now Previous Next Fashion Mar 27 Connor Ives and MAC team up to re-release the iconic ‘Protect The Dolls’ t-shirt Music Mar 12 The Pussycat Dolls confirm reunion with new single and tour – how to get tickets Music Jan 23 A full guide to the 2026 Harry Styles Together, Together tour including dates and presale info Shopping Nov 24 2025 Ten truly awesome Christmas gifts you can buy to support queer-owned businesses Trans Sep 09 2025 Lush creates ‘luxurious’ trans flag bath bomb to support trans charities Tickets Jun 25 2025 Dolly Parton announces mini Las Vegas residency after wrapping her last tour almost a decade ago Shopping May 15 2025 LEGO celebrates late gay icon Keith Haring with new art set: ‘Want this so bad’ Music Apr 18 2025 Primavera Sound’s most iconic queer performances, from Troye Sivan to Ethel Cain Exclusive Previous Next Exclusive Sep 11 Ania Magliano talks SNL UK season two and anti-LGBTQ voices in comedy: ‘We do edgy in the right way’ Exclusive Sep 11 Elliot Tuttle on Blue Film’s personal inspiration, rejection and taboo: ‘It’s about loneliness’ Exclusive Sep 09 OF star Andy Lee on love for gay fans, ‘poisonous’ creators and ‘harmful’ stunts: ‘Gay men lift me up every day’ Exclusive Sep 07 Real Housewives of London spill the tea: ‘She’d go to the opening of a packet of crisps’ Opinion Sep 04 Katseye in London: A showcase of real talent deserving of the deafening screams Exclusive Sep 02 Adrian Chiarella and Joe Bird on tackling conversion therapy in gay horror Leviticus Exclusive Aug 21 Sziget Festival drag and circus troupe want audiences to feel like family Exclusive Aug 20 Gay wrestler Anthony Bowens says Heated Rivalry shows authentic life of closeted athletes Register to save articles and more. It'll only take a minute and it's free. JOIN US TODAY! Already have an account? Log in here "/> Download the PinkNews app Award winning LGBTQ+ journalism About us Editorial Policy Contact us Advertise Work for us Terms and conditions Privacy policy Privacy manager Privacy Manager