Skip to Main Content Accessibility Help Menu CBC Gem CBC Listen Search Search Sign In Quick Links News Sports Radio Music Listen Live TV Watch news Top Stories Local Climate World Canada Politics Indigenous Business The National Health Entertainment Science CBC News Investigates Disability Life Go Public About CBC News Being Black in Canada More Alberta legislation on transgender youth, student pronouns and sex education set to become law | CBC News Loaded Calgary Alberta legislation on transgender youth, student pronouns and sex education set to become law A trio of bills affecting transgender people in Alberta have passed the final stage of debate in the legislature and are set to become law. 2SLGBTQ+ advocacy groups moving ahead with legal action in response Andrew Jeffrey · CBC · Posted: Dec 04, 2024 9:31 AM EST | Last Updated: December 4, 2024 Listen to this article Estimated 5 minutes The audio version of this article is generated by AI-based technology. Mispronunciations can occur. We are working with our partners to continually review and improve the results. Alberta Premier Danielle Smith announced the legislative changes in January. The bills will prohibit minors from receiving certain types of gender-affirming care and also require that parents opt-in before their children are taught about sex in class. (Darren Calabrese/The Canadian Press) Social Sharing After a trio of bills affecting transgender people in Alberta passed the final stage of debate in the legislature, a pair of 2SLGBTQ+ advocacy groups have said they're moving ahead with legal action in response, calling the legislation discriminatory. The Education Amendment Act, 2024, the Health Statutes Amendment Act and the Fairness and Safety in Sport Act,  first announced by Premier Danielle Smith in a provincewide video address in January, are set to become law. National advocacy group Egale Canada and the Alberta-based Skipping Stone Foundation confirmed Wednesday their intent to pursue legal action in response, arguing the legislation violates the constitutional rights of young 2SLGBTQ+ people. Danielle Smith unveils sweeping changes to Alberta's student gender identity, sports and surgery policies Alberta tables bills on transgender youth health care, students' pronouns, opt-in sex education The changes include requiring children under 16 to have parental consent if they want to change their names or pronouns at school. Students who are 16 or 17 won't need permission, but schools will need to let their parents know first. Students would not be able to learn about sex education, gender identity and sexual orientation in school unless their parents have opted in to them receiving that instruction. Any third-party instructional material would need approval from Alberta Education before it is used in the classroom. How gender-affirming health care for kids works in Canada If passed, the legislation would also prohibit doctors from treating those under 16 seeking gender-affirming treatment through puberty blockers or hormone therapy. Physicians would be prohibited from performing top and bottom gender surgeries on minors. Bottom surgery is already restricted to patients over the age of 18. All surgeries are currently performed in Quebec.  WATCH | Schools would have to inform parents when kids ask to change pronouns: Alberta tables bills to change health care, restrict gender-affirming care, sex-ed October 31, 2024 | Duration 2:42 The Alberta government has tabled a series of bills that would bring big changes to the health-care system, as well as limit who can get some gender-affirming treatments, and make parents opt in for sex education in schools. A third bill, the Fairness and Safety in Sport Act, would limit membership on female competitive sports teams to athletes who were female at birth. The bill will ban transgender athletes from competing in female amateur sports and require school and organizations to report eligibility complaints. Smith has said the government will work with leagues to set up coed or gender-neutral divisions for sports. According to the province, the Fairness and Safety in Sport Act is anticipated to take effect fall 2025, while the amendments to the Education Act will take effect on proclamation, which is anticipated in September 2025. The Health Statutes Amendment Act is expected to come into effect in the coming months. Constitutionality of new policies questioned Bennett Jensen, Egale Canada's director of legal, said on Wednesday he's deeply disappointed and concerned about the legislation's consequences, and the harm it's already caused for young people since being introduced. The policies have already led to increased bullying, as well as more young people feeling anxious, depressed and scared, Jensen said. He added the policies have also communicated to young people that there's something wrong with being transgender. "It's hard to properly describe what it feels like to be talking to kids across the province who tell you that they wouldn't be here if they hadn't had access to [puberty] blockers, or who tell you that they won't be here [if they're] denied access to medical care," Jensen said. "It's hard to capture how high the stakes are in this moment. And I don't think that we have a choice but to try to protect these kids as much as we can." Smith said the bills are necessary to protect children and female athletes. On Wednesday, Smith argued it isn't rare to put limitations on the kinds of decisions children can make for themselves. "We don't allow them to smoke, we don't allow them to do drugs, we don't allow them to drive. So we think that making a permanent decision that will affect one's fertility is an adult decision," Smith said. Smith added the government will be prepared to argue in court that parents have the ability to make decisions for themselves, until the kids are old enough to make those decisions themselves. The Saskatchewan government used the notwithstanding clause to guard similar legislation. The clause allows a government to temporarily override certain sections of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. Smith said she doesn't believe she'll need to invoke the notwithstanding clause to shield the policies from legal action, and that the legislation will be seen as reasonable and evidence-based. But she declined to say if she would use the clause to keep the laws on the books if the court challenges are successful. Jojo Ruba, an organizer for Parents and Kids Together, said he's thrilled about the legislation. He added that challenges to the bill will allow for further conversations on the topic. "We need to be able to love and show compassion to [transgender kids]. But showing love and compassion doesn't mean we have to agree with everything they decide as what's good for them. And we believe it's parents who know best for these kids," Ruba said. With files from The Canadian Press, CBC's Bryan Labby and Colleen Underwood CBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices · About CBC News Corrections and clarifications · Submit a news tip · Report error Related Stories Mandatory courses on physical education and wellness, careers coming to Alberta high schools Alberta gov't mulling regulations around micromobility vehicles like e-scooters Alberta government launches ad campaign on referendum questions Both sides of Alberta separation debate rally as momentum kicks up ahead of vote Alberta independence group releases its ‘transition plan’ to become a country Footer Links My Account Profile CBC Gem Newsletters About CBC Accounts Connect with CBC Facebook X YouTube Instagram Mobile RSS Podcasts Contact CBC Submit Feedback Help Centre Audience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON Canada, M5W 1E6 Toll-free (Canada only): 1-866-306-4636 About CBC Corporate Info Sitemap Reuse & Permission Terms of Use Privacy Notice Privacy Preferences Jobs Our Unions Independent Producers Political Ads Registry AdChoices Services Ombudsman Corrections and Clarifications Public Appearances Commercial Services CBC Shop Doing Business with Us Renting Facilities Radio Canada International CBC Lite Accessibility It is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges. Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem . About CBC Accessibility Accessibility Feedback © 2026 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved. Visitez Radio-Canada.ca