Philippines | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Philippines At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Legal Gender Recognition Possible? No LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? Yes Last Update: March 12, 2026 The Philippines consistently ranks in perception indices as among the most “ accepting ” countries in Asia toward LGBTIQ persons. Several recent surveys have demonstrated generally positive views regarding gay and lesbian people , as well as high levels of support for an antidiscrimination law covering sexual orientation and gender identity. However, a 2018 Social Weather Stations (SWS) survey found that only 22 percent of Filipinos supported same-sex civil unions, and a majority opposed trans women’s access to women’s toilets. Several laws and policies have aimed to advance LGBTIQ inclusion. Ex-President Rodrigo Duterte signed Executive Order No. 100 s. 2019 on December 17, 2019, institutionalizing the Diversity and Inclusion Program (DIP), which serves as a national initiative to consolidate efforts and enforce laws, rules, and issuances against discrimination. In 2023, President Ferdinand R. Marcos Jr. issued Executive Order No. 51 s. 2023 , amending EO 100 s. 2019 to further strengthen the DIP, reconstituting the Inter-Agency Committee on Diversity and Inclusion and establishing the Special Committee on Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Queer, Intersex, and Asexual (LGBTQIA+) Affairs . As of 2025, these Executive Orders are not yet being implemented. Nondiscrimination laws have been enacted at the barangay, city, municipal, and provincial levels . At the national level, antidiscrimination legislation has been filed in the Philippine Congress repeatedly since 1999 but has not been enacted into law. Two civil union bills have been filed since 2022, but they face opposition from religious and conservative legislators. Individuals can legally adopt regardless of sexual orientation or gender identity, but same-sex couples cannot file for joint or second-parent adoption, given that same-sex unions are not recognized under the law. The lack of legal recognition prevents same-sex couples from enjoying a range of other rights . The Anti-Bullying Act of 2013 prohibits “gender-based bullying” and includes sexual orientation and gender identity among its prohibited grounds. In 2017, the Department of Education introduced the Gender-Responsive Basic Education Policy , which was reiterated in 2022 . The policy calls for a review of public school curricula to identify and address all forms of gender stereotypes, including those related to LGBTIQ issues. The policy also requires schools to observe gender and development-related events, with June designated as LGBT Pride Month. The Safe Spaces Act of 2019 defines specific acts that constitute gender-based sexual harassment, including homophobic and transphobic slurs. The Magna Carta for Public Social Workers prohibits discrimination against public social workers based on their sex or sexual orientation. In 2023, the Philippines Supreme Court updated the 34-year-old Code of Professional Responsibility for the legal profession. Section 1 of Canon V prohibits lawyers from discriminating against clients based on various attributes, including sexual orientation and gender identity. In 2018, Republic Act 11166 established state policies that prohibit discrimination based on HIV and AIDS status. The law also protects against discrimination related to attributes such as sexual orientation, gender identity, and gender expression—factors that are often linked to HIV status, whether actual or perceived. The 2018 Mental Health Act ensures that service users have access to mental health services “on an equal and non-discriminatory basis,” including based on sexual orientation and gender identity. While conversion practices are not banned at a national level, in Bataan City , Section 4(h) of Ordinance No. 16 ( 2021 ) prohibits “non-consensual medical or psychological examination to determine, alter, or both, a person’s sexual orientation or gender identity or expression.” In 2009, the Philippines lifted a ban on openly gay and bisexual men and women from enlisting and serving in the Philippine Armed Forces. In 2017, it began allowing transgender people to join the military , but it applies its standards on its uniform policy based on one’s legal gender, as reflected on one’s birth certificate. However, discriminatory laws still exist. “Concealment of homosexuality or lesbianism” in a marriage constitutes fraud and can be grounds for annulment of marriage . Some localities legislate discrimination on the basis of Shariah. In 2019, M’lang, a municipality in Cotabato, passed an ordinance against so-called cross-dressing and homosexual relationships for Muslims, with the penalty of imprisonment. In 2022, the Shariff Aguak municipal government passed a similar law banning cross-dressing in public . Local leaders have also started anti-LGBTIQ campaigns to shame queer persons or forcibly separate same-sex couples. Trans people cannot access legal gender recognition. Since 2001, the Clerical Error Law of 2001 (RA 9048) has made it illegal for transgender persons in the Philippines to change their sex in their birth certificates. The law specifically states that “no correction must involve the change of nationality, age, status, or sex of the petitioner” without a judicial order. In 2008, the Supreme Court, in Republic of the Philippines v. Jennifer Cagandahan , stipulated that individuals who undergo gender-affirming surgery are not permitted to change their legal gender. However, individuals with Congenital Adrenal Hyperplasia, a rare intersex condition, are allowed to alter their legal gender. A bill that would enable this change through an administrative process is pending in Congress . This would remove the requirement of undergoing a costly and tedious court process, putting the country one step closer to guaranteeing the right of intersex persons to legal recognition. Outright’s research in 2025 indicates that lesbian, bisexual, and queer women in the country were subjected to various forms of online gender-based violence, including hate speech and sexual harassment, and that anti-LGBTIQ stigma impeded access to redress from official channels. Older LGBTIQ people in the country also faced specific challenges in housing, health care, and social security, as revealed by a 2023 Outright report . View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International