New record in suspected hate crimes - Police University College Skip to content Police University College - To frontpage Police University College – creating future security Valitse kieli Suomi Välj språket Svenska Select language English Search Menu Front page Education Education - submenu Bachelor of Police Services Master of Police Services Continuing education for police Bachelor of Rescue Services Other courses Cross-institutional studies Research and development Research and development - submenu RDI in brief RDI projects Student projects Publishing Ethics and open science About us About us - submenu The Police University College in brief For visitors Materials and publications Operational guidelines and quality Operational Quality Manual Sustainability and responsibility International activities Library Information about the website Privacy statements Current issues Current issues - submenu News Events Contact information Contact information - submenu Management and Chiefs of Units Invoicing Communication services Polamk on social media More contact information Police University College en Current issues News item suomi Lue artikkeli suomeksi svenska Läs artikeln på svenska English New record in suspected hate crimes Publication date 10.11.2025 10.01 Type: News item An annual report by the Police University College shows that the number of suspected hate crimes continued to increase in 2024. This “Poliisin tietoon tullut viharikollisuus Suomessa 2024” (Hate crime reported to the police in 2024) report shows that the police filed a total of 1,808 reports of offenses on suspected hate crimes. This was the highest figure ever in the history of hate crime investigation. Defamation and assault were the most common suspected hate crimes. Law does not recognize hate crimes: motive is decisive The report uses crime report information, which is used to analyze the suspicion of hate motive recorded in the report. The Finnish Criminal Code does not include the criminal categories of hate crime or hate speech, but hate motive is a basis for increasing the punishment. Therefore, any act that is defined by legislation as a crime can be a hate crime. The decisive factor is the motive of the act, which is ultimately determined by a court. The Police University College report defines suspected hate crimes as reports where a hate motive is manifest. In 2024, the number of suspected hate crimes increased in all motive groups in the report, except for crimes related to religion or belief. The most common motive was the victim's ethnic or national background. Hate crimes directed towards people with disabilities are increasing Besides ethnic or national background, significant numbers of crime reports related to other hate motives were filed. “There were again a third more suspected hate crimes directed towards disability than in the previous year. Reports related to sexual orientation, gender identity or gender expression are also increasing. Hate crime is therefore a diverse phenomenon that affects several different population groups,” says Jenita Rauta, researcher at the Police University College. “The trend is concerning. In my opinion, the increase in hate crimes against people with disabilities reflects, for example, a broader societal polarization in which those in vulnerable positions are targeted. In suspected hate crimes, the perpetrator is often known to the victim, which emphasizes the need to strengthen security not only in the home and immediate environment, but also in schools, workplaces, and other everyday communities. “On the other hand, hate crimes are also being identified better than earlier and reported more actively to the authorities, which increases the visibility of the phenomenon,” Rauta says. Monitoring provides a basis for development and discussion The monitoring of hate crime provides the authorities with comprehensive information on the number, nature and target groups of crimes. This information is needed to promote security and equality in society. “Providing information about hate crimes can also serve to initiate broader societal discussions that enable a change in prejudiced and discriminatory attitudes and structures,” Rauta adds. The Police University College’s report on hate crimes examines the trend and manifestations of hate crime in Finland each year. The Police University College has been monitoring the number of suspected hate crimes to its current extent since 2008. The statistics on suspected hate crime are based on crime reports screened out from the National Police Information System. Crime reports including suspected hate crimes in 2019–2024 Motive 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 Ethnic or national background 650 646 706 930 1,092 1,223 Religion or belief 133 108 133 121 165 158 Gender NA NA NA NA 6 11 Sexual orientation, gender identity or expression of gender 72 68 126 140 215 241 Disability 44 30 61 54 128 175 Total 899 852 1,026 1,245 1,606 1,808 Poliisin tietoon tullut viharikollisuus Suomessa 2024 (Hate crimes reported to the police in Finland in 2024, abstract in English) Previous reports on the Police University College website More information about hate crimes on the Finnish police website Front page top news Offences and criminal investigation Police University College Research and development operations Police University College hate crimes literary works publications research activities research activity research and development operations Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on LinkedIn | Print Share via Email Hidden Back to top Police University College PO BOX 123 (Vaajakatu 2) FI-33721 Tampere, Finland +358 295 480 121 [email protected] POLIISI.FI Polamk is part of the Finnish Police. Education Research and development About us Current issues Contact information Privacy statements Accessibility statement Search the site Search Subscribe to our news (poliisi.fi) Polamk on social media Feedback For the media Site map About the site © Police 2026