Russia's New Queer Purge: The Court Decision Driving the LGBT Community Into Exile There appears to be a technical issue with your browser This issue is preventing our website from loading properly. Please review the following troubleshooting tips or contact us at [email protected] . Close Skip to navigation Skip to search Skip to main content Skip to footer Foreign Policy Get analysis and alerts more quickly in the mobile app. Install Show expanded website navigation Back to Foreign Policy Magazine home page Latest Regions Asia & the Pacific China Middle East & Africa Americas Europe Newsletters View All Newsletters FP Live Latest Trending: Trump-Xi meeting United Nations General Assembly Website Search and Account Management Search Icon Search this website Search Search Preferences My FP Feed Saved Articles Newsletters Magazine Archive Subscription Settings FAQs Log Out Sign In Sign In Partner with FP at UNGA81 Partner with FP at UNGA81 Subscribe Subscribe Partner with FP at UNGA81 Partner with FP at UNGA81 Show expanded website navigation Feature: Russia’s New Queer Purge Share icon Share Copy Link icon Copy Link Link copied to clipboard Email icon Email Facebook icon Facebook Bluesky icon Bluesky X icon X LinkedIn icon LinkedIn WhatsApp icon WhatsApp Reddit icon Reddit Save icon Save Create an FP account to save articles to read later. Sign Up ALREADY AN FP SUBSCRIBER? LOGIN Download icon PDF Downloadable PDFs are a benefit of an FP subscription. Subscribe Now ALREADY AN FP SUBSCRIBER? LOGIN Gift Copy Link icon Copy Link Link copied to clipboard Email icon Email WhatsApp icon WhatsApp Gifting articles is a subscriber benefit. Subscribe Now ALREADY AN FP SUBSCRIBER? LOGIN This article is an Insider exclusive. Contact us at [email protected] to learn about upgrade options, unlocking the ability to gift this article. Back to Foreign Policy Magazine home page Preferences My FP Feed Saved Articles Newsletters Magazine Archive Subscription Settings FAQs Log Out Sign In Sign In Partner with FP at UNGA81 Partner with FP at UNGA81 Subscribe Subscribe Partner with FP at UNGA81 Partner with FP at UNGA81 Latest Newsletters World Brief Editors' Picks Africa Brief China Brief Latin America Brief South Asia Brief Southeast Asia Brief Situation Report The Reading List FP Bookshelf FP Weekend The New Geopolitics See All Topics Trump’s second term Shadow government War in Ukraine Crisis in the Middle East U.S. foreign policy Trade and economics U.S.-China competition Artificial intelligence Regions Asia & the Pacific China Middle East & Africa Americas Europe FP Live See All Video Trump’s UNGA speech is more disturbing than you think Can AI companies still be profitable with regulation? See All Podcasts Illustration with Adam Tooze headshot on a green background with the text Ones & Tooze Ones and Tooze Illustration with a male spy headshot and the text I Spy I Spy FP Live podcast logo Foreign Policy Live See All Magazine Fall 2026 print Issue Fall 2026 print Issue Print Archive See All Collections Energy After the Shock The Trump Way The Scramble for Critical Minerals The AI Arms Race The Trade Wars See All FP Analytics In-depth Special Reports Issue Briefs Power Maps and Interactive Microsites FP Simulations & PeaceGames Synthesis Reports Insight Briefs & Spotlights Graphics Database See All Events Heart Failure in Focus September 29 Where we'll be this year See All Search Search Icon Additional Navigation Bluesky icon Follow FP on Bluesky X icon Follow FP on X LinkedIn icon Follow FP on LinkedIn Instagram icon Follow FP on Instagram Facebook icon Follow FP on Facebook FP SOLUTIONS FP Analytics FP Events FP Studios Simulations and Peacegames Advertise with FP Country Reports Subscription Services Your FP Account Group Subscriptions Reprint Permissions FP Magazine Archive Buy Back Issues EDUCATION Graduate Education Guide FP for Education Institutional Access ABOUT FP Writer's Guidelines Contact FP Meet the Staff Work at FP AI Policy Privacy Policy Do Not Sell My Personal Information Terms of Use Accessibility Bluesky icon Follow FP on Bluesky X icon Follow FP on X LinkedIn icon Follow FP on LinkedIn Instagram icon Follow FP on Instagram Facebook icon Follow FP on Facebook Foreign Policy Magazine is a division of Graham Holdings Company. All contents (c) 2026, Foreign Policy LLC, a unit of Graham Digital Holding Company. All rights reserved. Foreign Policy, 1099 14th St NW, Suite 500 East, Washington, D.C., 20005. Powered by WordPress VIP Feature Russia’s New Queer Purge A secret court decision is driving the LGBTQ community into exile. August 6, 2024, 6:00 AM By J. Lester Feder A view from the ground level shows people across a clearing hold rainbow flags during a gay pride rally. The viewer is poised just behind the back of a person standing in front of the demonstrators, viewing them from between that person's two black boots. People hold rainbow flags during a gay pride rally in St. Petersburg, Russia, on Aug. 12, 2017. Olga Maltseva/AFP via Getty Images Human Rights Russia In March, a little-known volunteer organization dedicated to “reviving the religious and secular unity of the Russian people” escorted agents from the Internal Affairs Ministry and the Russian National Guard on a raid in the remote city of Orenburg, a city of 500,000 near the Kazakh border. Their target was a bar called Pose, which was locally famous for its drag shows. The volunteer organization, called Russian Community Orenburg, posted videos of the raid online, highlighting people in skimpy outfits, asking attendees why they were in a “faggot bar,” and showing clubgoers cowering on the floor as agents conducted their search. In March, a little-known volunteer organization dedicated to “reviving the religious and secular unity of the Russian people” escorted agents from the Internal Affairs Ministry and the Russian National Guard on a raid in the remote city of Orenburg, a city of 500,000 near the Kazakh border. Their target was a bar called Pose, which was locally famous for its drag shows. The volunteer organization, called Russian Community Orenburg, posted videos of the raid online, highlighting people in skimpy outfits, asking attendees why they were in a “faggot bar,” and showing clubgoers cowering on the floor as agents conducted their search. “This is not [a scene from] the decaying West, this is from within the ranks of a country that is at war for a third year,” the group lamented when it posted the video online. Conservatives in Orenburg had been outraged about Pose since it opened in 2021, according to the Russian outlet Mediazona , and a local media outlet published a sensationalist article about the club, complaining that laws like Russia’s longstanding “gay propaganda ban” did not give local law enforcement the tools to shut it down. That law, enacted in 2013, only bans materials made available to minors and carries light penalties. The agents in Pose that night were armed with a major new weapon in Russia’s long crusade against its queer citizens. Last November, in a secret proceeding sealed to observers, Russia’s Supreme Court decreed the “international LGBT movement” to be an “extremist” organization, adding it to a list of banned entities that includes terrorist groups and the political operation of the late opposition politician Alexei Navalny. The decision is so broad that it can potentially be used against anyone who has—or simply “promotes”—a “nontraditional sexual orientation,” including people who are not LGBTQ but support queer people’s rights. People convicted under the law face up to 10 years in some of Russia’s harshest prisons, where queer people fear sexual violence or worse. A drag queen performs onstage at a club in Moscow, wearing fishnet tights and a costume shaped like a giant red heart. The performer holds up an empty glass, their mouth open wide as they sing or lip-synch. In the foreground, the blurry hands of audience members are seen waving or holding phones to record video. A drag queen performs during a performance in a pub in Moscow on Nov. 13, 2022. Alexander Nemenov/AFP via Getty Images “This is not a decision to punish you for a few years. This is the death penalty, and it’s clear for everybody,” one longtime activist said, referring to the harsh conditions in Russian prisons. (The activist asked not to be named due to security concerns.) “We will not have a chance to survive there.” Pose’s owner and two of its employees are now awaiting trial. A court announcement on Telegram notes they are accused of “being persons with nontraditional sexual orientation … who also support the views and activities of the international public LGBT association banned in our country.” Others close to the bar are now living in fear. Only one regular Pose patron would agree to speak with me, and he said his friends had mostly stopped communicating with one another, afraid they could be discovered. Several had left the city or the country. He thinks he should maybe leave the country, too, but doesn’t have a passport or the money to go into exile, nor a safe place to flee to. Pose, the patron said, “was my whole life. It was the only place where they accepted me.” Two uniformed police officers hold the arms of a gay rights activist they are detaining on a city street in Moscow. The activist holds a handwritten sign in Russian, which translates to "Homophobia is a shame." Police officers detain a gay rights activist during a protest against anti-LGBTQ Russian laws outside the headquarters of the Sochi 2014 Olympics Organizing Committee, seen in Moscow on Sept. 25, 2013. Alexander Nemenov/AFP via Getty Images Homophobia became a major part of President Vladimir Putin’s political strategy in 2013. That’s when the Duma passed a national version of the “gay propaganda law.” The legislation was domestically useful to Putin, who was seeking to reinforce his political support by cozying up to the Russian Orthodox Church. The law, which went into effect just before Russia was due to host the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi, provoked an international outcry, and Putin detected homophobia could also be a tool of foreign policy . His government leaned into the controversy, portraying Russia as a defender of traditional values against a degenerate West that had lost its way. Kremlin allies also began using it in a more targeted way in Ukraine, where an oligarch close to Putin ran an ad campaign warning closer ties to the European Union would force the recognition of same-sex marriages. His decade-long strategy has used homophobia to try to drive a wedge between Eastern Europeans and the West, as well as to delegitimize fundamental notions of human rights and democracy. To some Russian LGBTQ activists, it was inevitable that the Russian government would double down on going after queer people following Putin’s invasion of Ukraine in February 2022. Swiftly, the Russian government made a broad effort to dismantle the last spaces for opposition to his regime. Other steps have included shuttering Russia’s remaining independent media outlets and effectively banning any speech critical of the war or of Putin. The organization Coming Out, which held an eight-day annual public event in St. Petersburg as recently as 2021, decided to move its whole team outside the country almost as soon as Russian tanks rolled across Ukraine’s borders. Read More A woman wearing a Soviet military uniform directs pedestrians during an exhibition of Soviet tanks and military vehicles at Red Square in Moscow. A woman wearing a Soviet military uniform directs pedestrians during an exhibition of Soviet tanks and military vehicles at Red Square in Moscow. The Broken Bargain of Russian Womanhood Why they won’t rebel against the war that kills their men. Essay | Anastasia Edel A man looks down at his cell phone as he walks on a sidewalk beneath a looming billboard showing a photo of a military pilot, the letter Z, and text in Russian translated as "Everything will work out for us." A Moscow city street is seen beneath a blue sky in the background. A man looks down at his cell phone as he walks on a sidewalk beneath a looming billboard showing a photo of a military pilot, the letter Z, and text in Russian translated as "Everything will work out for us." A Moscow city street is seen beneath a blue sky in the background. Russians Expect Nothing From Putin’s War Political apathy is a psychological survival mechanism—and a possible route to peace. Argument | Kristaps Andrejsons “A few weeks after the war started, I understood that things were not going according to the plan,” said Aleksandr Voronov, Coming Out’s former director, who led its relocation to Lithuania. “I understood that they were going to start looking for new enemies.” Putin also justified the war partly as a crusade against the LGBTQ movement, which he initially derided in a speech announcing the full-scale invasion as part of a Western plot to “destroy” Russia’s traditional values. Then, in September 2022, he referred to the movement as “ satanic ” in a speech illegally annexing four Ukrainian regions. As the war continued, the regime’s propaganda machine pushed outlandish stories, rushing a state television crew to an LGBTQ center in decimated Mariupol that it claimed was “practically under the direct patronage” of U.S. President Joe Biden. Russian lawmakers also responded, expanding the gay propaganda ban in November 2022 and enacting a draconian anti-trans bill in 2023 that would outlaw gender confirming medical treatment, prohibit people from changing their gender on legal documents, and prohibit trans people from adopting children. A line of Ukrainian service members and LGBTQ community activists carry a banner bearing the photographs of fallen service members while marching down a street during Kyiv Pride. More activists are visible in a crowd behind them, many carrying umbrellas. Ukrainian service members and LGBTQ community activists carry a banner bearing the photographs of fallen service members as they take part in a march during Kyiv Pride on June 16, 2024. Sergei Supinsky/AFP via Getty Images “A special military operation is taking place not only on the battlefields, but also in the consciousness, in the minds and souls of people,” said Aleksander Khinshtein, a member of the Russian parliament and an author of the updated gay propaganda law, in a speech to the Duma in October 2022. “LGBT today is a tool of hybrid warfare. And in this hybrid warfare, we must protect our values. We must protect our society and we must protect our children.” Despite many threats to Russia’s queer movement—the original gay propaganda law, a state requirement that forced many LGBTQ organizations to register as “foreign agents,” growing vigilante violence—Russia’s queer movement had remained vital throughout most of Russia for most of the past decade. (A notable exception is Chechnya, where local officials have detained, tortured, or murdered dozens of queer people.) Queer organizations continued to work and even hold major public events like St. Petersburg’s long-running QueerFest, a multiday festival of LGBTQ-themed talks and exhibitions ending with a large public concert. But the extremism designation is far more dangerous than any previous threat. Part of the danger comes from the court’s secrecy around the ruling. It not only closed the proceedings, but also barred LGBTQ organizations from participating when they tried to challenge the Ministry of Justice’s petition. Technically, any group the government seeks to declare extremist has a right to respond to the allegations against it, but the Ministry of Justice brought its petition against the “international LGBT movement,” which meant no specific organization would have standing to respond. And even when a group of LGBTQ activists formed an organization called the International LGBT Movement in an effort to intervene, the court refused to allow them to participate. In fact, the Supreme Court never officially made the order public. It only reached LGBTQ activists in their lawyers when prosecutors in the city of Nizhny Novgorod attached it to their filings in a case against a woman who was arrested for wearing rainbow-colored earrings. (The six-color pride flag and other LGBTQ symbols were banned by the order, and the court sentenced the woman to administrative detention, despite the fact that the woman’s earrings were not discernible pride symbols—they had seven colors and were shaped like frogs.) Olga Baranova, who has been executive director of an LGBTQ community center in Moscow since 2015, told me that the movement is now backpedaling after years of encouraging people to come out. They used to believe visibility would gradually make Russian society more supportive of LGBTQ people. Now it’s just dangerous. Olga Baranova, a young person with short hair and glasses and wearing a white button-down shirt and lanyard, sits on the floor during an interview in a room with a green rug and orange curtains. Photos and drawings hang on strings from a wall in the background. Olga Baranova (right), the director of a shelter for LGBTQ people in Russia, is seen during an interview in Moscow on Nov. 10, 2017. Alexander Nemenov/AFP via Getty Images “We’ve worked all these years just to be [out] and to be in the mainstream. And now we just say, ‘Okay, stop, stop, stop!’” Baranova said. Most people she knows who were visibly out have left the country, Baranova said—as has she—and she and other activists now advise people living in Russia to stay in the closet for their own safety. Natalia Soloviova, chair of the Russian LGBT Network, a federation of more than 20 queer organizations from across the country, called the decision “absolutely horrifying,” but said that even despite it, the reality is that most queer people are not able or don’t want to flee Russia. The war has made it harder for LGBTQ people to reach countries that promise the most safety to LGBTQ refugees—like the United States or members of the European Union—because those countries have radically restricted visas for Russians. Georgia, which allows Russians to enter without visas, has become an important haven for Russian dissidents of many kinds in the past two years. But Georgia’s ruling party has advanced its own laws attacking LGBTQ people, one of many initiatives to bring the country closer to Moscow’s orbit. Still, Soloviova estimates a significant exodus, with “hundreds” going abroad. Almost 40 percent of the Russian LGBT Network’s member organizations have relocated at least some members of their team abroad, generally visible activists or people in senior management. And many other queer people have been displaced internally, fleeing threats in their hometowns for larger cities where their pursuers are less likely to find them. Baranova acknowledged that if queer people all either leave the country or live in the closet, as she and others counsel them to do, “the movement will expire.” Soloviova is one of those who’ve left the country. She first spoke to me in April from Georgia’s capital, Tbilisi, but has since left Georgia. (She feared that country’s new propaganda law and also knew of three queer Russians who were attacked on the street.) She is from the Siberian city of Novosibirsk—Russia’s third-largest city—and said she’d never thought she’d live outside Russia until the extremism designation. At least five members of a Russian riot police force surround two gay rights activists as they are detained during a sunny day in St. Petersburg. One activist looks toward the camera with a serious expression as their arm is grabbed, holding a rainbow flag in the other. The other activist, a person with teal-dyed hair, holds a cellphone close to their chest. Russian riot police detain gay rights activists during the International Day Against Homophobia and Transphobia in St. Petersburg on May 17, 2019. Olga Maltseva/AFP via Getty Images Even today, key details about the Supreme Court order remain secret. For example, the order refers to a list of 281 individuals and 40 organizations considered part of the outlawed movement, but no one knows who is on those lists. “The hardest thing here is that you have no opportunities to protect yourself,” Soloviova said. “You never know if you’re going to be prosecuted or not, and you will know only when the police come to your house directly and get you to prison directly.” The charges in Orenburg are the first to reach court, but police appear to be flexing their new muscles across the country. In February alone, Mediazona reported several raids on “private parties” and a night club. LGBTQ activists told me they knew about several other similar incidents but didn’t want to share details, fearing publicity would put those involved in greater danger. The arrests in Orenburg are just the beginning, worries Stanislav Seleznev, a lawyer with the Russian human rights organization Net Freedoms Project. Regional security officials generally have quotas for making significant arrests, and now LGBTQ people are an untapped pool of so-called “extremists” that can help them reach their goals. “I’m compelled to assume that we are currently witnessing a model process that will be spread as much as possible all over the Russian regions,” Seleznev said. “Many more people are in a very dangerous situation now.” Additional reporting contributed by a Russian reporter who asked not to be named, fearing that this article could lead to their arrest under the extremism law. Human Rights Russia J. Lester Feder is a reporter and photographer who has covered LGBTQ rights in more than 40 countries. Read More On Human Rights | Russia | Sex and Gender Join the Conversation Commenting is a benefit of a Foreign Policy subscription. Subscribe Subscribe Already a subscriber? Log In . View Comment s Join the Conversation Join the conversation on this and other recent Foreign Policy articles when you subscribe now. Subscribe Subscribe Not your account? Log out View Comment s Join the Conversation Please follow our comment guidelines , stay on topic, and be civil, courteous, and respectful of others’ beliefs. View Comment s You are commenting as . Change your username | Log out Change your username: Username I agree to abide by FP’s comment guidelines . (Required) Confirm CANCEL Confirm your username to get started. The default username below has been generated using the first name and last initial on your FP subscriber account. Usernames may be updated at any time and must not contain inappropriate or offensive language. Username I agree to abide by FP’s comment guidelines . (Required) Confirm OTHER SUBSCRIPTION OPTIONS Academic Rates Specialty rates for students and faculty. Multi-year Lock in your rates for longer. Groups Equip your organization with powerful global intelligence. Stories Readers Liked Go to slide 1 Go to slide 2 Go to slide 3 Go to slide 4 Go to slide 5 Go to slide 6 Go to slide 7 Go to slide 8 Go to slide 9 Go to slide 10 A statue of a seated, bearded man with a bare torso and draped cloth around his waist, holding a scroll in one hand, positioned in front of a row of large classical columns. Realism Is Unrealistic By Matthew Kroenig An illustration of Donald Trump in a blue suit and long red tie gesturing with open hands in front of a grid patterned background with jagged red, blue, and black line graphs diving downward. Trump Has Peaked By Ravi Agrawal Five people sit in folding chairs pushed up against a wall, all of them on their phones and several looking board. Text on the wall behind them says "AI for Real" with images of robotic arms and household appliances printed around it. China’s Success Is Forcing a U.S. AI Rethink By Robert A. Manning , Giulia Neaher An illustration depicting a man submerged up to his nose in water. The wavy water is divided horizontally into three color bands that mimic a flag: white foam at the very top peaks, a deep blue middle section filled with bubbles, and a red lower section covering his neck and suit jacket. His blue eyes look upward with a wide, strained expression. As the Tide Turns Against Putin, Beware the Drowning Man By Peter Frankopan Negotiators from the United States, Canada, and five European countries converse after finishing the draft of the North Atlantic Treaty in Washington on March 18, 1949. Trans-Atlanticism Isn’t Dead—It’s Being Renegotiated By Alexandra de Hoop Scheffer A woman crosses a road in front of a mural depicting Russian President Vladimir Putin in Kashira, Russia, southeast of Moscow, on Oct. 16, 2017. The Western Myth of Russian Greatness By Christian Caryl An illustration of a vintage-style map featuring North America and parts of Europe and Africa. Overlaid on the map are 3D red brick walls shaped exactly like the borders of the contiguous United States and Alaska, casting long shadows to the right. America, the Once Global Nation By Odd Arne Westad A creative illustration against a pale yellow background showing a garden planter containing a dense green hedge. Five human arms emerge from the hedge, with four of the hands holding small flags of China, Russia, the United States, and the European Union, while the fifth hand holds the flag of India. Hedging Is the New Normal By Suzanne Nossel An illustration showing a pair of hands tightly wringing out an American flag. Water droplets shaped like missiles squeeze out of the twisted fabric and fall toward a puddle shaped like the map of Iran on a red background. U.S. Power Is Wrung Out By Hal Brands An aerial photo shows Doha in the booming petrostate of Qatar. For What AI Could Do to Democracies, Look to the Petrostates By Cullen Hendrix U.N. General Assembly A wide-angle shot of a large assembly hall filled with an audience seated at curved rows of desks facing a main stage. The stage features a prominent circular U.N. emblem on a textured, golden backdrop, flanked by two large video screens showing Guterres at the podium. UNGA Convenes With Uncertainty on the Horizon This year’s high-level gathering takes place as the Guterres era approaches its end. Analysis | J. Alex Tarquinio A group of five children sit side by side in the soft-focused foreground, facing each other in conversation. In the sharply focused background, a vast area of destroyed buildings and rubble stretches across the landscape beneath a clear sky. It’s Time to Update the U.N. Sustainable Development Goals Argument | David Miliband U Thant speaks during a session of the Security Council focused on the Cuban missile crisis. Back to Basics at the U.N. Argument | Daniel Forti A studio shot of an artifact displayed on a small wooden base against a solid blue background. The artifact features a large, rough-textured stone disk with an uneven edge. Embedded or emerging from the upper-left edge of the stone is a green, weathered metal emblem resembling the United Nations logo, including an olive branch and a partial grid pattern. The stone structure is mounted on two short black metal pillars attached to a polished wooden stand, which has a small white label on the front that reads "EXHIBIT 1: The United Nations". Why an Obituary for the U.N. Is Premature Essay | James Traub Trending Germany Is Officially Adrift By Jeff Rathke A Raucous Reckoning With Brazil’s Dictatorship By Lucas Iberico Lozada What Machiavelli Would Say About Trump By Stephen M. Walt Saudi Arabia Bribed the Wrong People By Nicholas Grossman Can AI Be Regulated? By Cameron Abadi , Adam Tooze Loading graphics Footer navigation Back to Foreign Policy Magazine home page Bluesky icon Follow FP on Bluesky X icon Follow FP on X LinkedIn icon Follow FP on LinkedIn Instagram icon Follow FP on Instagram Facebook icon Follow FP on Facebook FP SOLUTIONS FP Analytics FP Events FP Studios Simulations and Peacegames Advertise with FP Country Reports Subscription Services Your FP Account Group Subscriptions Reprint Permissions FP Magazine Archive Buy Back Issues EDUCATION Graduate Education Guide FP for Education Institutional Access ABOUT FP Writer's Guidelines Contact FP Meet the Staff Work at FP AI Policy Privacy Policy Do Not Sell My Personal Information Terms of Use Accessibility Bluesky icon Follow FP on Bluesky X icon Follow FP on X LinkedIn icon Follow FP on LinkedIn Instagram icon Follow FP on Instagram Facebook icon Follow FP on Facebook Foreign Policy Magazine is a division of Graham Holdings Company. All contents (c) 2026, Foreign Policy LLC, a unit of Graham Digital Holding Company. All rights reserved. Foreign Policy, 1099 14th St NW, Suite 500 East, Washington, D.C., 20005. Powered by WordPress VIP