Korea's first transgender soldier laid to rest at national cemetery amid controversy | Aju Press ASIA Insight Industry Market Policy World Opinion Entertainment Visuals AI PICK search button Sign In search button Korea's first transgender soldier laid to rest at national cemetery amid controversy by Park Ung Posted : June 25, 2024, 17:51 Updated : June 25, 2024, 17:56 Share Share facebook facebook twitter twitter URL URL close Print Text size Text size A A A A close The burial ceremony of Korea's first transgender soldier Byun Hee-soo is being held at the National Cemetery in Daejeon on June 24, 2024. Yonhap SEOUL, June 25 (AJU PRESS) - Korea's first-ever transgender soldier was buried at the National Cemetery in Daejeon on Monday. Some 60 activists gathered to protest her burial there, arguing her service did not qualify her to be laid to rest in the cemetery. Byun Hee-soo, who killed herself in 2021 after being forcibly discharged from the military, made headlines in Korea, a country known for its conservative stance on controversial LGBT issues. Born male in 1998, Byun enlisted in the Army in 2017 and underwent general reassignment surgery in Thailand while on leave in 2019 after experiencing severe depression caused by gender dysphoria. Despite Byun's plea to remain in the military, she was discharged in January 2020 because the loss of genitals is deemed a physical disability and gender dysphoria is classified as a mental disorder. Byun then sought to overturn the decision through a string of court trials and administrative litigation, but she was suddenly found dead in her home in Cheongju, North Chungcheong Province in February 2021 In December 2022, the Army concluded her death was not considered to be in the line of duty, but her burial at the cemetery was finally approved after the National Human Rights Commission requested reconsideration. Prior to the burial ceremony, protesters gathered at the Daejeon National Cemetery, claiming that her death was a personal matter. Joo Joseph, head of right-wing civic group People's Action for Freedom and Human Rights, said, "As far as I know, it is said that the eligibility requirements for burial at the National Cemetery is stringent. It's doubtful what she truly did for the country." But the Center for Military Human Rights Korea expressed gratitude that the government approved her burial at the cemetery, emphasizing that Byun's desire, as someone who wished to live proudly as a soldier, was marred by the discriminatory discharge." Copyright ⓒ Aju Press All rights reserved. Related Expelled transgender solider found dead at home ahead of reinstatement hearing Tens of thousands of people gather to celebrate gender equality at Seoul Queer Festival AJPlay Latest LG Elec joins Nvidia network for AI data-center cooling Samsung plans DX town hall amid bonus dispute Korea's single-stock leveraged ETF trading falls below one-tenth after curbs Korea's 5-year overseas chip tech leak tally more than triples Korea's Q3 profit estimates rise, chip forecasts climb Data-center AI chip market seen at $860 bln by 2030 Lee calls for renewed Korea-Mexico trade talks Trump, Xi set AI talks, oppose tolls on global waterways Seoul, Kyiv clash over secrecy of North Korean prisoner transfer Alcohol-related deaths rise among Korean women as health costs climb About Copyright Terms of Use Privacy Statement YouTube Instagram Addres: LEEMA Building, 11th floor, 42, Jong-ro 1-gil, Jongno-gu, Seoul Tel: 82-2-767-1652 Mail: ajupress@ajunews.com Copyright ⓒ AJU Press All rights reserved. 닫기