In limbo. For many transgender Russians, emigration is the only means of survival — Novaya Gazeta Europe Support Support News Data Research Video Photo Scrollytelling Online Opinions Interviews Stories Analytics Categories Economy Society Politics Culture Sports Europe War in Ukraine Russia Without Censorship Newsletters All Front Page Undesirable Zekletter Aiz un ārpus robežas Novaya Gazeta Europe About the Project Читайте на русском Authors Support Archive of Issues Cookie Policy Privacy Terms of Use Found an error? Report it! Support Support Stories Society In limbo For many transgender Russians, emigration is the only means of survival Alyona Itskova June 29, 2024 LGBT activists take part in a rally in Moscow, May 6, 2017. Photo: Kirill Kudryavtsev / AFP / Scanpix / LETA Alyona Itskova Political correspondent When Vladimir Putin signed a law prohibiting gender reassignment surgery and making it impossible to legally switch gender on official documents, it came as yet another severe blow to the transgender community in Russia, whose members were already subject to discrimination, threats of violence, legal troubles and barriers to gender-affirming care. Link copied! Queer people in Russia experience near-constant violence and prejudice in a country that provides virtually no protection for LGBT rights of any kind. In 2023, one in three transgender Russians said they had been threatened with physical violence. According to a joint study conducted by the LGBT rights advocacy groups Coming Out and the Sphere Foundation, transgender individuals are more likely not to discuss their identity with their friends and family in fear of violent retaliation than to share their identities with those in their social circles. read also Institutional prejudice What the full text of the Russian Supreme Court judgement labelling the LGBT movement ‘extremist’ tells us Tom Waugh January 21, 2024 read also Institutional prejudice What the full text of the Russian Supreme Court judgement labelling the LGBT movement ‘extremist’ tells us Tom Waugh January 21, 2024 Novaya Gazeta Europe asked a trans person and a non-binary person about their experiences over the past year and described what the Russian ban has meant to them personally. Dari, transgender woman, 28 years old, southern Russia From a young age, Dari felt like a girl. She used female pronouns to refer to herself, wanted to participate in traditionally feminine activities and to wear female clothing. Despite her certainty that her gender identity did not align with her gender assigned at birth, Dari understood that the world she grew up in was quite intolerant of her gender expression. “From an early age, I realised that you can’t talk about this, you can’t tell anyone because it’s wrong. I carried this feeling with me almost all my life,” Dari told Novaya Gazeta Europe. Dari said she suffered from an intense feeling of internalised homophobia and transphobia for many years in her youth. Throughout her adolescence, Dari tried to conform to what was expected of her by aligning herself with a traditionally masculine lifestyle. “At some point in my life, I considered myself gay or bisexual. Internal transphobia was even stronger. Admitting to myself that I was a trans woman was even worse than admitting that I was gay,” she said. read also A poor bill of health Systemic barriers and prejudice are increasingly depriving trans people in Russia of healthcare Alyona Itskova May 29, 2024 read also A poor bill of health Systemic barriers and prejudice are increasingly depriving trans people in Russia of healthcare Alyona Itskova May 29, 2024 The shame and emotional turmoil Dari felt about her identity culminated in a suicide attempt. For Dari, her attempted suicide was a life-changing moment that pushed her to come out as a transgender woman to a few friends and begin her transition. In February 2023, Dari was evaluated by a psychiatrist and received a diagnosis of “transsexualism” which, at the time, was a legal prerequisite for transgender people to access gender-affirming care. Many physicians who are able to administer gender-affirming care in Russia fear that by doing so they may lose their medical licence or face legal trouble. After Putin signed an anti-transgender law in July 2023, it became far more difficult to receive hormone treatment. Despite these barriers, Dari began to use injectable hormones instead of expensive tablet medication. Sold under the table, injectable hormone treatments in Russia are more affordable but also far more dangerous as the hormone is not usually produced by a medical professional. “Injections are sold illegally. There are people who produce the hormone at home and then send it to their friends. I don’t know exactly how they do it, it seems to be based on some kind of oil,” Dari said. Opponents of the law banning “LGBT propaganda” kiss during a protest outside the State Duma building in Moscow, January 22, 2013. Sergey Karpukhin / Reuters / Scanpix / LETA Dari continued to informally communicate with her endocrinologist, who, though not recommending Dari take homemade medication and warning her she would be taking it at her own risk, conceded that the dosage and composition of Dari’s injection was correct. Many physicians who are able to administer gender-affirming care in Russia fear that by doing so they may lose their medical licence or face legal trouble. The consequent lack of care has forced already vulnerable patients to seek dangerous, expensive and scarce alternatives. Since receiving hormone treatment, Dari’s appearance has drastically changed. However, she is still identified as male in all of her official documents, which has made finding a job incredibly difficult. “I can’t find any typical male work, because they’ll just beat me up there. But they won’t hire me as a woman either,” Dari said, adding that she hopes to be able to leave Russia soon, having understood that emigration is the only way out of her current situation. Pride participants in St. Petersburg hold a rainbow flag as police stand opposite in the background, August 12, 2017. Photo: Olga Maltseva / AFP / Scanpix / LETA Roman, non-binary person, 25 years old, Thailand Roman is a non-binary graduate student in psychology at St. Petersburg State University who is currently working on a dissertation focused on the formation of identity among transgender people. “My scientific advisor and I have already been refused publication by three journals, plus I’m not allowed to take the exam,” Roman says of the challenges he’s faced attempting to publish his academic research. read also Gay abandon Russian queer activists look back at 20 years of attempting to successfully hold a Pride parade Pavel Kuznetsov June 26, 2024 read also Gay abandon Russian queer activists look back at 20 years of attempting to successfully hold a Pride parade Pavel Kuznetsov June 26, 2024 The LGBT censorship at Roman’s university in St. Petersburg is typical of that in many other educational institutions in Russia. Roman recounted how “ideological purges” related to the ban on “LGBT propaganda” have affected the subject material universities are allowed to teach across the country. Scholarship in academic journals and magazines has also been impacted. “There is a Moscow magazine that refuses to accept work if the word ‘gender’ is used at all,” Roman said. Before Russia’s “LGBT propaganda” law came into force, Roman described St. Petersburg as a relatively comfortable and safe place to study and says that he was even able to publish in academic journals, give lectures and participate in LGBT activism. When the law passed, Roman quickly understood that everything would change. “I was just giving a lecture and saw the news on my phone. I then told the students that they were most likely the last group to listen to lectures about queerness, sexuality and so on.” Roman and his partner. From Roman’s personal archive. After the Russian Supreme Court recognised “the international LGBT movement” as an extremist organisation, Roman and his partner decided to leave Russia. They now live temporarily in Thailand while they wait for an EU visa. In Russia today, nearly every LGBT person faces discrimination, violence and amid a complete absence of legal protection. Although Dari and Roman’s circumstances vary considerably, both have described how their ability to live safely in Russia has been adversely affected by the extremely negative and discriminatory political rhetoric of recent years. Unfortunately, as the rights of LGBT Russians continue to recede, it remains unlikely that the situation for queer people in Russia will improve any time soon. Alyona Itskova Political correspondent Share Link copied! More on the topic Opinions Society Erasing the rainbow Russia has come full circle on its persecution of sexual minorities under Vladimir Putin’s rule Topics Society More by this author Leaping to freedom How one conscientious objector fled conscription in Russia by jumping from a moving train Extreme fines Russian lawmakers consider penalising citizens for viewing ‘extremist’ content online — from punk songs to Navalny videos Those who won’t A teacher forced to flee Russia after refusing to indoctrinate her pupils starts a new life in France More stories ‘They just threw the book at me’ Inside Russia's campaign to push teenagers out of the classroom and into trade schools Russia’s turn against attorneys As the Russian legal system continues to lose its autonomy, lawyers themselves are increasingly facing prosecution for their work ‘Moscow has been seized by ghouls’ Writer Svetlana Satchkova’s first novel in English follows a Russian film director who stays out of politics — until it comes for her Funny games Russian preschoolers will soon be subjected to pro-war indoctrination before they can even read or write ‘Add a few tables and voila — it’s a restaurant’ How Russia’s Vologda region banned the sale of alcohol, but not its purchase and consumption ‘I could at least get out. They couldn't.’ How a Ukrainian woman found herself working in a Cambodian scam compound ‘We want to make the invisible visible’ A new initiative aims to challenge the dominance of Russian by supporting literature in the country’s numerous indigenous languages ‘Books are at the heart of everything’ Pioneer Summer sparked a wave of censorship in Russia. Now it’s part of a growing literary resistance. Between Putin and the Pope The head of Russia’s Catholics resigned for 'health reasons’. But sources say the real reason was his anti-war stance News Russia arrests Estonian man visiting wife whose EU asylum claim was denied September 25 Kazakhstan court rejects asylum appeal of former Navalny volunteer, clearing way for extradition to Russia September 24 CIA warned Italy, Spain and France of possible Russian drone attacks, Spanish media reports September 24 Czech Republic expels Russian propagandists who came to film ‘documentary series’ on Europe September 23 Readers' choice Most popular articles from the last two weeks Data Interactive map: Attacks on Russian territory, updated in real time As Ukraine fights back, the war has spread to at least 60 Russian regions Alesya Sokolova Ksenia Storozheva June 18 Interviews Is modern Russia fascist? Historian and political theorist Roger Griffin on the Putin regime, the hallmarks of fascism and the perils of dwelling on ‘taxonomy’ Vlad Dokshin Milana Ochirova September 24 Stories ‘We are Russians, and God is with us!’ Moscow’s ultranationalist march is effectively back, rebranded as a religious procession. Here’s what it looked like this year. Vladislav Lisitsyn September 11 Sections News Data Research Video Podcasts Photo Scrollytelling Online Opinions Interviews Stories Analytics Video & Podcasts Terrible News Interviews Categories Economy Society Politics Culture Sports Europe War in Ukraine Russia Without Censorship Newsletters All Front Page Undesirable Zekletter Aiz un ārpus robežas Novaya Gazeta Europe About the Project Читайте на русском Authors Support Archive of Issues Cookie Policy Privacy Terms of Use Contacts General Questions [email protected] Advertising: [email protected] Social Media X (Twitter) Instagram Novaya Gazeta Europe, 2026, Editor-in-Chief Kirill Martynov Found an error? Select it and press Ctrl+Enter to report it to us Found an error? Thank you! We will look into the error.