Saudi Arabia | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Saudi Arabia At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? No Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? No Legal Gender Recognition Possible? No LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? No Last Update: March 12, 2026 In Saudi Arabia, criminal penalties are based on Shariah, and same-sex sexual activity is prohibited with a maximum punishment of death. People suspected of homosexuality, as well as trans women, have been arrested , detained , tortured , and prosecuted based on morality-related grounds, such as “cross-dressing,” “offenses against Islam,” “attacks against public morals,” and “encouraging or promoting homosexuality.” There have been several known executions for same-sex intimacy, but most of these cases involve additional criminal charges , such as terrorism, child abuse, rape, or murder, and it is often unclear whether “sodomy” is used as an aggravating factor or arbitrarily added by authorities. In 2019, the state security agency published a video categorizing feminism and homosexuality as “extremist ideas” and criminal acts punishable by prison and flogging. Freedom of expression, assembly, and association is heavily restricted in the country. Saudi Arabia censors materials that it considers to be contrary to religious values or public morals, and has arrested persons publishing queer-affirming content. In 2025, a film was banned in Saudi Arabia because it featured a gay actor. The country prohibits rainbow-colored toys, clothing, and other items, claiming that they send a “poisoned message” to children . Outright has not identified any LGBTIQ organization operating in the country. Saudi Arabia has at times attempted to project a queer-friendly image. In May 2023, it updated its official tourist website to state that it welcomed LGBT travelers . In 2024, the head of Saudi Arabia’s 2034 World Cup bid unit also announced that “the LGBTQ community” would be “hosted with open arms and open hearts” as long as they “respected the law of privacy.” No assurances in writing have been provided. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International