BASHKKA files legal complaint against Frankfurt Airport for discrimination · News ⟋ RA RA Events Music Magazine 2000-25 Search Person My account Menu Events Iceland Festivals Music RA Podcast Reviews Mix of the day Playlists Magazine Features Films RA Exchange News ArrowLeft Magazine BASHKKA files legal complaint against Frankfurt Airport for discrimination Published Fri, Jun 20, 2025, 09:00 Words Nyshka Chandran Share Facebook X (Formerly Twitter) WhatsApp The Munich-born artist said staff intentionally disregarded her gender identity during a security screening. BASHKKA has accused Frankfurt Airport of "a targeted, degrading act of transphobic harassment." Speaking to Resident Advisor , the Munich-born DJ and producer, a trans woman, said security officers degraded her as they questioned her gender during a routine screening on November 23rd last year. She has since filed a legal complaint under Germany’s Equal Treatment Act. In a statement to Frankfurt Airport, which RA has seen, BASHKKA recounted the incident in detail. When she stepped into the body scanner, a male security officer stopped her and asked whether she was a man or woman. "A heated exchange followed, during which I repeatedly requested to be searched by a female officer after they asked me for an additional pat down—a standard procedure I've experienced countless times as a trans woman," BASHKKA's statement read. "Yet this officer refused. Instead, he doubled down, saying: 'I don't care what you identify as. You're not a woman, and you can't be searched by a female officer. End of discussion.' What he said wasn't just discriminatory—it was an act of psychological violence." When the search was over, BASHKKA said the officer turned his back on her and "laughed with his colleagues" without offering an apology. "It's my right to be searched by a woman officer," she told RA . "I travel every weekend and I have never been searched by a male officer–there was always automatically a female officer when I had to be searched." "The intentional disregard of my gender identity by the security officer constitutes a violation of my dignity," she continued. "It was an environment of intimidation, hostility, humiliation, degradation and insult. This constitutes discrimination in the form of harassment, as defined by the Equal Treatment Act." "Germany has self-determination laws in place for this exact reason," she added. "This absolutely should not happen in an international hub like Frankfurt Airport, a symbolic space of cultural exchange and human connection." In response to a series of emails from her lawyer dated from early this year, a spokesperson for Frankfurt Airport apologised via email and said the officer's behaviour "was in no way associated with negative intentions." RA has seen all correspondence between BASHKKA's lawyer and the airport. The spokesperson's emails acknowledged there were communication problems between BASHKKA and the accused personnel, noting that the security service provider had been instructed to investigate the matter. Security staff will also be trained on how to deal with transgender and gender non-conforming individuals, the spokesperson promised. In response to RA 's request for comment, a spokesperson from Frankfurt Airport said that they were taking the complaint seriously but could not comment on specifics. "We assure you that we'll thoroughly investigate any incidents and take appropriate action if necessary," the statement concluded. We'll continue reporting on this story as it unfolds. Artist: BASHKKA RA Discover About ̸ Tickets ̸ Resale ̸ Advertise ̸ Jobs Get RA apps RA Guide ̸ RA Scanner Are you a promoter? Submit event Bcorp Iceland Language English Privacy · Terms · Cookies · Sitemap © 2026 Resident Advisor Ltd. All rights reserved . YouTube SoundCloud Spotify Itunes X (Formerly Twitter) Facebook Instagram