Austrian police arrest 15 over wave of LGBTQ hate attacks You need to enable JavaScript to run this app. Skip to content Skip to main menu Skip to more DW sites Latest videos Latest audio Regions Africa Asia Europe Latin America Middle East North America Germany Topics Climate Equality Health Human Rights Migration Technology Categories Business Science Environment Culture Sports In focus German politics Ethiopia United Nations Latest audio Latest videos Live TV Advertisement Crime Austria Austrian police arrest 15 over wave of LGBTQ hate attacks Richard Connor with AFP, dpa 03/21/2025 March 21, 2025 Police in Austria have said they arrested 15 people in connection with a hate crime campaign directed against LGBTQ people. https://p.dw.com/p/4s6qh Image: Erwin Scheriau/APA/picture alliance Advertisement Austrian investigators on Friday said they had arrested 15 people in connection with a wave of hate crime attacks against LGBTQ people. The 12 men and three women are accused of creating fake dating platform accounts to lure LGBTQ people to locations where they were attacked. What did Austrian police say about the attacks? Criminal investigator Michael Lohnegger said the alleged perpetrators had tricked at least 17 people into going to remote locations. Once there, several masked individuals attacked the victims, with the assaults filmed and uploaded to groups online. Investigators said the suspects had falsely accused their victims of being pedophiles. "None of the victims is a pedophile," said Joachim Huber, deputy police chief of the state of Styria. The suspects are between the ages of 14 and 26 and included 11 Austrians, a German citizen, a Croatian, a Romanian and a Slovakian citizen, according to authorities. Investigators said they assumed the number of victims was much higher than the reported figures. During house raids, officers were said to have recovered weapons and Nazi memorabilia. Over 400 police officers and criminal investigators carried out the raids at 23 locations in seven Austrian provinces Friday. Edited by Sean Sinico Richard Connor Reporting on stories from around the world, with a particular focus on Europe — especially Germany. Send us your feedback Your feedback Advertisement Skip next section More on Crime from Europe More on Crime from Europe UK: 5 arrested after 'major incident' near Fairford air base Bomb disposal teams were checking "suspicious vehicles" in Whelford, near a UK air base used by the US military. Crime 09/27/2026 September 27, 2026 Cheap But Deadly - On the Trail of Product Counterfeiters Germany, a key market for counterfeit goods in Europe: from fake designer brands to life-threatening medications. Crime 09/22/2026 September 22, 2026 German police probe arson attack on Wuppertal synagogue The man was detained near the scene shortly after allegedly trying to set fire to Wuppertal's synagogue. Crime 09/18/2026 September 18, 2026 Show more Skip next section Related topics Related topics Austria Footer About DW Who we are Press DW Global Media Forum DW offers Learn German DW Akademie Service Newsletters Reception FAQ Contact Topics from A to Z Headlines B2B Sales & Distribution Travel Advertising German News Service Follow us on Add DW as preferred source on Google © 2026 Deutsche Welle Privacy Policy Legal notice Digital accessibility Data privacy settings