ECADE: ‘Draconian’ buggery and indecency laws soon to be challenged in court! | THE STAR - St Lucia Sign in Home Local News Business Funnies Headlines Health Notices Sign in Welcome! Log into your account your username your password Forgot your password? Privacy Policy Password recovery Recover your password your email Search Friday, November 21, 2025 Sign in / Join About Us Privacy Policy Advertise with us! Send Us News Sign in Welcome! Log into your account your username your password Forgot your password? Get help Privacy Policy Password recovery Recover your password your email A password will be e-mailed to you. THE STAR – St Lucia Home Local News All Business Funnies Headlines Health Is St. Lucia’s Miami-based Consul General Another Casualty of the Silly… When it comes to keeping us safe from imagined disasters PJP… Was St. Jude Handing Over Ceremony Based On the OKEU story? THE LOST HALF DECADE AND WHY THE SLP SHOULD NOT BE… Notices Advertisement Home Local Headlines ECADE: ‘Draconian’ buggery and indecency laws soon to be challenged in court! Local Headlines ECADE: ‘Draconian’ buggery and indecency laws soon to be challenged in court! By Joshua St. Aimee - December 1, 2019 2632 Facebook Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp On October 31, the Eastern Caribbean Alliance for Diversity and Equality (ECADE) announced its intention to challenge the buggery and indecency laws in Barbados, St. Kitts-Nevis, Antigua and Barbuda, Grenada and Saint Lucia. The group says the laws contribute to stigmatisation, and legitimize hate speech, discrimination and violence—and it is their intention to file court papers before the end of 2019. A well-known Saint Lucian businessman told the STAR that he welcomes any legal challenge that seeks to ensure fundamental human rights are protected. Asked about the local attitude towards the community, he said: “I’m openly gay. However, society has a way of over time becoming more accepting of certain things. In no way does it mean that things are great now or the best it can be.” ECADE argues that the “archaic” buggery and indecency laws contribute to the stigmatisation of people in the LGBT community. He added that the environment when he was a teenager, compared with now, “is not as bad as it used to be”. The society, he says, is “more accepting”. However, while the situation may have improved, said our source, it does not mean that persons who do not have a voice are not facing discrimination and violence. “I know of at least seven or eight individuals, one of whom was a partner of mine, that was murdered,” he went on. “The type of violence was horrifying. It wasn’t just a gunshot. It was kicking in the person’s teeth, tying them to a tree, stabbings of various sorts. When you look at any crime that is hate-based, they all have the same storyline.” The business owner said ECADE is taking a stand “to ensure that people have the fundamental right to live their own life freely”. On Tuesday, External Affairs Minister Sarah Flood-Beaubrun also reacted to ECADE’s decision. She said the laws are in place and, as far as she is aware, government has no plans to review the Criminal Code in that regard. The minister reserved further comment until the legal challenge is actually filed. Facebook Twitter Pinterest WhatsApp Previous article SLP Confronts History at Tuesday’s House . . . Not a Pretty Sight! Next article Rugby Technical Director “irreplaceable”. Will he stay or will he go? Joshua St. Aimee RELATED ARTICLES MORE FROM AUTHOR Local Is St. Lucia’s Miami-based Consul General Another Casualty of the Silly Season? Local When it comes to keeping us safe from imagined disasters PJP is still our safest bet! Local Was St. Jude Handing Over Ceremony Based On the OKEU story? Subscribe to Email Updates Enter your email address to get news story updates. Enter your Email Address Subscribe Join 20.7K other subscribers EDITOR PICKS Will the resurrected Ubaldus Raymond Scandal summon up new ghosts? July 17, 2024 Kenny: Politicians and Academics not in Harmony with the People’s Aspirations! June 23, 2023 Lawyer Demands Prison For STAR Publisher! April 13, 2023 Hours & Info P.O. Box 1146 Castries St. Lucia W.I. 1-758-450-7827 news@stluciastar.com POPULAR POSTS Post Mortem reveals man died from Snake Bite January 25, 2013 RBC successfully completes sale of its Eastern Caribbean banking operations April 1, 2021 Restaurant Impossible: The reality of the restaurant business today in Saint... August 21, 2020 POPULAR CATEGORY Local 8033 bbApp 3736 Headlines 2962 pulse 1191 Sports 1005 Commentary 907 Photo Gallery 490 Business 455 Health 443 Follow Us ABOUT US FOLLOW US About Us Privacy Policy Advertise with us! Send Us News © Loading Comments... Write a Comment... Email (Required) Name (Required) Website