Kraków’s new mayor to become first to attend city’s LGBT parade | Notes From Poland News Insights Po polsku Topics Politics Society Culture Business History Education Energy & Climate Law Media Defence Notes from Pawland Podcasts Notes from Poland Podcast The VoiCEE podcast About us Our story Editorial team Advisory Board Editorial and diversity policies Notes from Poland Foundation Contact Newsletter Notes from Poland Newsletter Select Page Kraków’s new mayor to become first to attend city’s LGBT parade May 9, 2024 | Politics , Society In one of his first decisions after taking office, the newly elected mayor of Kraków, Poland’s second-largest city, has announced that he will attend the city’s annual LGBT Equality March next week, something his long-serving predecessor never did. He will also hang a rainbow flag at city hall. “I want to build a sensitive and tolerant Kraków, a home for everyone and open for everyone,” wrote Aleksander Miszalski in a letter to organisers of the parade, which is celebrating its 20th anniversary this year. “Diversity is our strength.” Miszalski was sworn into office on Tuesday this week after being elected last month . He hails from the centrist Civic Coalition (KO) group of Prime Minister Donald Tusk, who came to power in December last year promising to strengthen LGBT rights . #Krakow #nowy #prezydent #MarszRówności pod #patronat .em Aleksandra Miszalskiego! 🏳️‍🌈 Nowy prezydent zapowiedział również udział w Marszu oraz zapowiedział wywieszenie Tęczowej Flagi na magistracie. @OlekMiszalski @krakow_pl https://t.co/4wVOEzAGV2 pic.twitter.com/V8148WBIfe — Kraków (@krakow_pl) May 8, 2024 Miszalski’s predecessor, the independent Jacek Majchrowski, who ruled the city from 2002 until this year, became an honourary patron of the Equality March in 2021. However, he never attended the event. In his letter to the organisers, Miszalski said that he wanted to be the first mayor to do so. “If you allow me, it will be a great pleasure to take part in this year’s edition of the march.” The mayor’s office also announced that an LGBT rainbow flag would hang on city hall on the day of the march. A record 12,000 people are estimated to have attended today's LGBT Equality March in Kraków under the slogan "against exclusion and discrimination". The annual event, which was first organised in 2004, is held under the patronage of the city's mayor https://t.co/th8TDDOP0u pic.twitter.com/q3J3VkKIBt — Notes from Poland 🇵🇱 (@notesfrompoland) May 20, 2023 In 2021, when serving as a member of parliament representing Kraków, Miszalski condemned the decision of the Małopolska province, in which Kraków is located, to adopt a resolution declaring “opposition to the introduction of LGBT ideology”. Later that year, the province withdrew the resolution amid the threat of losing EU funds, as did a number of other Polish local authorities that had passed similar anti-LGBT declarations. Many of those resolutions were proposed and approved by politicians from the national-conservative Law and Justice (PiS) party, which ruled Poland from 2015 until the end of last year. PiS led a vociferous campaign against “LGBT ideology”, as a result of which Poland has been ranked for the last four years as the worst country in the EU for LGBT people according to the annual Rainbow Europe index released by ILGA-Europe, a Brussels-based NGO. Poland remains the EU's worst country for LGBT people, according to the annual Rainbow Europe ranking https://t.co/j83yAOtrcT — Notes from Poland 🇵🇱 (@notesfrompoland) May 11, 2023 However, the new ruling coalition that came to power in December has pledged to improve LGBT rights, including by introducing legal recognition for same-sex couples and making anti-LGBT hate speech a crime . Under the rule of former mayor Majchrowski, Kraków itself – in contrast to the surrounding province – sought to become more LGBT-friendly. In 2021, for example, it introduced a programme of support for LGBT youth . The mayors of a number of other large Polish cities, such as Wrocław and Poznań, have also lent their official patronage to local LGBT marches. Few, however, have attended them, with Warsaw’s mayor Rafał Trzaskowski and Gdańsk’s Aleksandra Dulkiewicz among the exceptions. Some smaller towns also now have annual LGBT parades. In 2022, Milicz, with a population of just over 11,000, became the smallest place in Poland to host one . Figures from each of the three main groups that make up Poland’s new ruling coalition, including a government minister, have outlined plans to introduce same-sex unions However, one of them has ruled out the idea of also allowing same-sex couples to marry https://t.co/cxBsVqy8Lk — Notes from Poland 🇵🇱 (@notesfrompoland) December 18, 2023 Notes from Poland is run by a small editorial team and published by an independent, non-profit foundation that is funded through donations from our readers. We cannot do what we do without your support. Main image credit: Jakub Wlodek / Agencja Wyborcza.pl Daniel Tilles Daniel Tilles is editor-in-chief of Notes from Poland . He has written on Polish affairs for a wide range of publications, including Foreign Policy , POLITICO Europe , EUobserver and Dziennik Gazeta Prawna . Latest news Russia condemns Polish city’s “barbaric” removal of Monument of Gratitude to the Red Army History , News , Politics The fate of the monument has been subject to a long-running legal and political battle in Rzeszów. Poland extends tax rights to same-sex couples with foreign marriages Law , News , Politics , Society The decision adds to marital benefits now available in Poland to same-sex couples married elsewhere in the EU. Prosecutors drop case in which Wałęsa was accused of lying about being communist collaborator History , Law , News , Politics “Truth has triumphed over an attempt to rewrite history,” wrote the justice minister. MORE NEWS You may also like Russia planning “accidental” strikes on eastern NATO states, warns Poland Sep 18, 2026 | Defence , Hot news , News Russia wants to create a sense of “NATO’s helplessness”, said Prime Minister Donald Tusk. European Parliament strips Polish far-right leader of immunity to face Holocaust denial charge Sep 16, 2026 | History , Hot news , Law , News It is the sixth time that the EP has lifted Braun’s immunity, and the second time for charges of Holocaust denial. China overtakes Germany as Poland’s biggest source of imports for first time Sep 16, 2026 | Business , Hot news , News It ends a period of around 35 years in which Germany had consistently held top spot. MORE HOT NEWS We can only do this thanks to your support! We are an independent, nonprofit media outlet, funded through the support of our readers. If you appreciate the work we do, please consider helping us to continue and expand it. SUPPORT US! FUNDACJA NOTES FROM POLAND Kazimierza Morawskiego 5 / 127 30-102 Kraków, Poland NIP: 677 243 97 04 KRS: 0000758506 [email protected] Topics NEWS INSIGHTS POLITICS SOCIETY CULTURE BUSINESS EDITOR’S PICK READER’S CHOICE PO POLSKU Copyright © 2026 Notes From Poland | Design jurko studio | Code by 2sides.pl Manage Consent To provide the best experiences, we use technologies like cookies to store and/or access device information. Consenting to these technologies will allow us to process data such as browsing behavior or unique IDs on this site. Not consenting or withdrawing consent, may adversely affect certain features and functions. Functional Functional Always active The technical storage or access is strictly necessary for the legitimate purpose of enabling the use of a specific service explicitly requested by the subscriber or user, or for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission of a communication over an electronic communications network. Preferences Preferences The technical storage or access is necessary for the legitimate purpose of storing preferences that are not requested by the subscriber or user. Statistics Statistics The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for statistical purposes. The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for anonymous statistical purposes. Without a subpoena, voluntary compliance on the part of your Internet Service Provider, or additional records from a third party, information stored or retrieved for this purpose alone cannot usually be used to identify you. Marketing Marketing The technical storage or access is required to create user profiles to send advertising, or to track the user on a website or across several websites for similar marketing purposes. Manage options Manage services Manage {vendor_count} vendors Read more about these purposes Accept Deny View preferences Save preferences View preferences {title} {title} {title} Manage consent Notes from Poland is run by a small editorial team and published by an independent, non-profit foundation that is funded through donations from our readers. We cannot do what we do without your support. × Agnieszka Wądołowska managing editor Agnieszka Wądołowska is managing editor of Notes from Poland. She has previously worked for Gazeta.pl and Tokfm.pl and contributed to Gazeta Wyborcza , Wysokie Obcasy, Duży Format, Midrasz and Kultura Liberalna” ARTICLES BY THIS AUTHOR × Weronika Strzyżyńska contributing editorial assistant Weronika Strzyżyńska is currently studying journalism at Goldsmiths as a Scott Trust Bursary recipient. She has written on issues immigration and Brexit for New Statesman and Prospect ARTICLES BY THIS AUTHOR × Juliette Bretan contributing writer Juliette Bretan is a freelance journalist covering Polish and Eastern European current affairs and culture. Her work has featured on the BBC World Service, and in CityMetric, The Independent, Ozy, New Eastern Europe and Culture.pl. ARTICLES BY THIS AUTHOR X × Paweł Kowal advisory board member Associate Professor at the Institute of Political Studies of the Polish Academy of Science, member of the Polish parliaments ARTICLES BY THIS AUTHOR × Shana Penn advisory board member Executive Director of Taube Family Foundation ARTICLES BY THIS AUTHOR × Agata Gostyńska-Jakubowska advisory board member Senior Research Fellow at the Global Europe Centre, University of Kent. ARTICLES BY THIS AUTHOR × Andrzej Nowak advisory board member Professor at the Institute of History of the Jagiellonian University ARTICLES BY THIS AUTHOR X × Timothy Garton Ash advisory board member Professor of European Studies at Oxford University ARTICLES BY THIS AUTHOR × Olga Tokarczuk advisory board member Author, winner of 2018 Nobel Prize in Literature ARTICLES BY THIS AUTHOR × Norman Davies advisory board member UNESCO Professor at the Jagiellonian University and Professor Emeritus at University College London ARTICLES BY THIS AUTHOR × Ben Koschalka assistant editor Ben Koschalka is a translator and the assistant editor at Notes from Poland . Originally from Britain, he has lived in Kraków since 2005. ARTICLES BY THIS AUTHOR × Sioban Doucette author Siobhan Doucette is a historian whose work focuses the opposition movement in Communist Poland. Her first book, Books Are Weapons: The Polish Opposition Press and the Overthrow of Communism , is available from University of Pittsburgh Press. It focuses on the Polish independent publishing movement from 1976 to 1989. ARTICLES BY THIS AUTHOR × Maria Wilczek deputy editor Maria Wilczek is deputy editor of Notes from Poland. She also contributes regularly to The Economist and Al Jazeera, and has also written for The Times, Politico Europe, The Spectator and Gazeta Wyborcza. She was previously Marjorie Deane fellow at The Economist in London (2018) and a business consultant at the Boston Consulting Group in Warsaw. Maria is a graduate of the University of Oxford and a student at the Polish School of Literary Reportage. ARTICLES BY THIS AUTHOR × Paulina Olszanka Solutions journalism project manager Paulina is a journalist and writer with a background in anthropology, social theory & political economy. She has worked for Fairfax Media , the Polish Press Agency, the Guardian and De Volkskrant × Stanley Bill founder, editor-at-large Stanley Bill is the founder and editor-at-large of Notes from Poland. He is also Senior Lecturer in Polish Studies and Director of the Polish Studies Programme at the University of Cambridge, where he works on Polish culture, politics and history. Stanley has spent more than ten years living in Poland, mostly based in Kraków and Bielsko-Biała. He founded Notes from Poland in 2014 as a blog dedicated to personal impressions, cultural analysis and political commentary. He is committed to the promotion of deeper knowledge and understanding of Poland. He is the Chair of the Board of the Notes from Poland Foundation. ARTICLES BY THIS AUTHOR × Daniel Tilles editor-in-chief Daniel Tilles is editor-in-chief of Notes from Poland and assistant professor of history at the Pedagogical University of Krakow. He has written on Polish affairs for a wide range of publications, including Foreign Policy , POLITICO Europe , The Independent and Dziennik Gazeta Prawna . ARTICLES BY THIS AUTHOR X × Pin It on Pinterest Support us!