This island nation is set to decriminalise homosexuality | PinkNews About Us Advertise Work with us Login Register Latest News View all UK US World Health Politics Sport Business Culture View all TV Film Celebrity Drag Theatre Music Gaming Lifestyle View all Beauty Careers Fashion Relationships Travel Shopping View all Deals Recommended Fashion & Beauty Tickets Video View all News & Politics Entertainment Lifestyle Discover Trans Awareness Week Drag Race Explainers The Queer Agenda Toggle menu Account Register Login Current Affairs This island nation is set to decriminalise homosexuality Aug 03 2017 Written by Josh Jackman Share Save for later Comment (Flickr) The Cook Islands are moving to decriminalise homosexuality. The nation of 15 islands, which sits in the south Pacific between Hawaii and New Zealand, outlawed male homosexuality in 1969. But a new Crimes Bill would overturn the current law, removing the two sections which ban gay sex. Cook Islands Crimes Act 1969 The country, which has a population of 21,000, created the bill’s current draft with help from New Zealand, according to Cook Islands News . It would eliminate sections 154 and 155 of the 48-year-old law, under which men face up to seven years in prison for gay sex, or five for “any indecent act with or upon any other male”. The laws even specifically state: “It is no defence to a charge under this section that the other party consented.” Tellingly, the two sections come directly before a law about bestiality. The nation’s only LGBTI community group, the Te Tiare Association, has welcomed the move. (Flickr) Group member Valentino Wichman said the law’s homophobic sections were “draconian provisions” which originated in British colonial rule. He pointed out that New Zealand and Britain have long decriminalised homosexuality in their own countries. In fact, last month Britain marked 50 years since partial decriminalisation of male homosexuality. “Thank you very much for giving us the opportunity to make our submission of support for amending the provisions which criminalise homosexuality,” Wichman added. (Getty) Wichman said that LGBT people still live in fear on the islands, especially because they are often shunned by their family and friends. “What people tend to forget is that there is a very real personal aspect to this argument of decriminalising homosexuality,” he said. “Everyone has a family member or friend that is lesbian, gay, bisexual, transsexual, and queer or intersex. There are real people affected behind this debate.” (Getty) There are still around 70 countries in the world where homosexuality is illegal. And decriminalising homosexuality does not completely fix society, as Britain has found. A PinkNews poll conducted for the 50th anniversary showed that 42 percent of Brits who have an opinion believe that gay sex is not natural. More: cook islands decriminalisation decriminalisation of homosexuality gay men Government Hawaii Homosexuality Law New Zealand New Zealand Politics south pacific Queer News. Straight Up. The LGBTQ+ stories you don’t want to miss, delivered to your inbox daily. Email address required Must be valid email Register By registering you agree to our Privacy Policy Thanks for registering! You can update your email subscriptions at any time in the My profile section of your account. Dec 01 2023 16 TV stars you grew up watching who later came out as LGBTQ+ Related articles World Aug 19 2023 How the Cook Islands fought off the shackles of colonialism and freed its LGBTQ+ community Law Apr 17 2023 Cook Islands finally decriminalises homosexuality: ‘Now we are truly equal’ News Jul 09 2021 Island nations of Saint Lucia and Saint Kitts and Nevis yet again refuse to legalise gay sex News Dec 10 2020 Bhutan votes to decriminalise homosexuality in ‘momentous day’ for the tiny Buddhist kingdom World Oct 01 2020 Decriminalisation of gay sex on the Cook Islands stalls yet again in devastating blow to queer community Latest News Previous Next Celebrity Sep 25 Trans influencer calls out Nikki Glaser for stand-up joke about what’s ‘in her pants’ Culture Sep 25 Trans pro wrestling trailblazer Gisele Shaw signs exclusive NWA contract Bisexual Sep 25 The Traitors star Freddie Fraser’s mum’s emotional response to his coming out Celebrity Sep 25 Lili Reinhart says Hollywood ‘too afraid’ to greenlight lesbian vampire project Celebrity Sep 25 Carly Rae Jepsen describes moment Heated Rivalry inspired her son’s name Celebrity Sep 25 John Green ‘heartbroken’ for trans Harry Potter fans as he talks JK Rowling Current Affairs Sep 25 JD Vance claims James Talarico has a “weird obsession with children in drag” News Sep 25 Susan Sarandon, Hannah Einbinder and Caleb Hearon detained outside UN after protesting Netanyahu What to buy now Previous Next Fashion Mar 27 Connor Ives and MAC team up to re-release the iconic ‘Protect The Dolls’ t-shirt Music Mar 12 The Pussycat Dolls confirm reunion with new single and tour – how to get tickets Music Jan 23 A full guide to the 2026 Harry Styles Together, Together tour including dates and presale info Shopping Nov 24 2025 Ten truly awesome Christmas gifts you can buy to support queer-owned businesses Trans Sep 09 2025 Lush creates ‘luxurious’ trans flag bath bomb to support trans charities Tickets Jun 25 2025 Dolly Parton announces mini Las Vegas residency after wrapping her last tour almost a decade ago Shopping May 15 2025 LEGO celebrates late gay icon Keith Haring with new art set: ‘Want this so bad’ Music Apr 18 2025 Primavera Sound’s most iconic queer performances, from Troye Sivan to Ethel Cain Exclusive Previous Next Exclusive Sep 11 Ania Magliano talks SNL UK season two and anti-LGBTQ voices in comedy: ‘We do edgy in the right way’ Exclusive Sep 11 Elliot Tuttle on Blue Film’s personal inspiration, rejection and taboo: ‘It’s about loneliness’ Exclusive Sep 09 OF star Andy Lee on love for gay fans, ‘poisonous’ creators and ‘harmful’ stunts: ‘Gay men lift me up every day’ Exclusive Sep 07 Real Housewives of London spill the tea: ‘She’d go to the opening of a packet of crisps’ Opinion Sep 04 Katseye in London: A showcase of real talent deserving of the deafening screams Exclusive Sep 02 Adrian Chiarella and Joe Bird on tackling conversion therapy in gay horror Leviticus Exclusive Aug 21 Sziget Festival drag and circus troupe want audiences to feel like family Exclusive Aug 20 Gay wrestler Anthony Bowens says Heated Rivalry shows authentic life of closeted athletes Register to save articles and more. It'll only take a minute and it's free. JOIN US TODAY! Already have an account? Log in here "/> Download the PinkNews app Award winning LGBTQ+ journalism About us Editorial Policy Contact us Advertise Work for us Terms and conditions Privacy policy Privacy manager Privacy Manager