Amsterdam broadens reporting points for anti-LGBTQIA+ violence during world pride | NL Times Skip to main content Toggle navigation Main navigation Top stories Health Crime Politics Business Tech Culture Sports Weird 1-1-2 Image Mayor Femke Halsema on Amsterdam's boat in the Canal Parade during Pride Amsterdam 2024 - Credit: Gemeente Amsterdam / Gemeente Amsterdam - License: All Rights Reserved Crime Politics Culture Lifestyle anti-LGBTQIA+ anti-LGBTQIA+ violence lgbtqia+ Safer Spaces initiative Nieuwe Kerk Stedelijk Museum Stadsarchief Reguliersdwarsstraat hub » More tags « Less tags Monday, 22 June 2026 - 16:10 Share this article: Opens in a new window Opens in a new window Opens in a new window Opens in a new window Opens in a new window Opens in a new window Amsterdam broadens reporting points for anti-LGBTQIA+ violence during world pride Amsterdam is expanding how visitors can report anti-LGBTQIA+ discrimination and violence during World Pride by broadening the reporting role of existing “Safer Spaces” across the city, AT5 reported on Monday. The update builds on earlier measures announced by Mayor Femke Halsema, who said such incidents will be investigated with priority. There are agreements in place for police, enforcement officers, and organizers to “act quickly if incidents occur” during the event, held from July 25 to August 8. The reporting network includes a central Meldpunt RITA location in the Reguliersdwarsstraat, along with designated “Safer Spaces” at the Nieuwe Kerk, the Stedelijk Museum, the Stadsarchief, and several hotels across Amsterdam. The development comes as the city prepares to welcome around 1.4 million World Pride visitors. The new measures follow previous figures cited by Halsema showing between 25 and 45 anti-LGBTQIA+ incident reports during recent Pride events in Amsterdam. Those cases included vandalism, public nuisance, theft, discrimination, insults, intimidation, and serious assault, with perpetrators typically quickly fleeing. Halsema said reports of discrimination during World Pride will be rapidly forwarded to police. There is also a public campaign encouraging reporting. The mayor added that all visitors must feel “free and safe” during the event and that prevention requires “extra vigilance.” More like this Image Survey: Many LGBTQIA+ youth feel unsafe at home, school Image PM Rob Jetten has received 2,293 homophobic responses to his X posts in 6 months Image New campaign teaches young people how small comments harm LGBTQIA+ acceptance Image Thousands gather in Amsterdam in solidarity with Pride Berlin after attack Follow us: Latest stories AZ striker Mexx Meerdink scores twice as Oranje beat Serbia 2-1 for Xavi's first win Maastricht University suspends Gazan student after post claiming Oct. 7 Israel attack 15,000 parents take first-aid courses for young children, up from 9,000 in 2022 Merwede Bridge on the A27 reopens after early finish of weight-cutting work Rarely lent Matisse art to be shown at H’ART Museum in Amsterdam from Oct. 3 to Feb. 14 Top stories Insiders allege PM Jetten wants to scrap benefit cuts, speed Box 3 tax shift Five arrested after 2 stabbed in Eindhoven Flash fire at neighbourhood barbecue injured 8 in De Wilp Victim of NDSM shooting in Amsterdam-Noord may have known his killer from prison The weekend is expected to be mostly dry; Temperatures could reach 29°C Tuesday © 2012-2026, NL Times, All rights reserved. Footer menu Change Privacy Settings Privacy Policy Contact Partner Content