Cardinal: homosexuality a form of prostitution | PinkNews About Us Advertise Work with us Login Register Latest News View all UK US World Health Politics Sport Business Culture View all TV Film Celebrity Drag Theatre Music Gaming Lifestyle View all Beauty Careers Fashion Relationships Travel Shopping View all Deals Recommended Fashion & Beauty Tickets Video View all News & Politics Entertainment Lifestyle Discover Trans Awareness Week Drag Race Explainers The Queer Agenda Toggle menu Account Register Login Current Affairs Cardinal: homosexuality a form of prostitution May 09 2007 Written by Tony Grew Share Save for later Comment The opposition of the Roman Catholic church to gay Pride parades reached a new low today when the Archbishop of Riga called homosexuality “total corruption in the sexual arena” and “an unnatural form of prostitution.” An open letter from Cardinal Janis Pujats demands a referendum on the issue of same-sex marriage and calls on crowds of people to take to the streets of Riga to oppose the Pride march on June 3rd. “If there are 1,000 sexually crazy people acting foolishly in the square of Pride, then the people’s march in Riga should have at least 40,000 or 50,000,” he wrote. “That proportion would give the government and public thought enough reason to leave sexual perversion outside the law.” Queer News. Straight Up. The LGBTQ+ stories you don’t want to miss, delivered to your inbox daily. Email address required Must be valid email Register By registering you agree to our Privacy Policy Thanks for registering! You can update your email subscriptions at any time in the My profile section of your account. The Roman Catholic leader recommends holding the “provocative demonstration (Pride), in a location that is closed and limited some way – a garden or square.” The Cardinal calls gay Pride a “foreign-inspired action” and his wide-ranging attacks show an underlying unhappiness with the new Latvia as an EU member. “If a person’s beliefs are godless, then there is little hope to get rid of sexual dependency. “And it is not wonder that homosexuals, now that they have noticed quite a sexualised society, are attacking us with their perversions,” he wrote. The Cardinal claims that no human rights document covers gay people as a protected minority. He also uses a report from 243 Latvian doctors as proof that homosexuality is an illness. “The claim which says that homosexuality is a permissible version of normal behaviour or a special inborn disease is not true. “The dependency created by this immorality and the resulting perverse behaviours must be seen as a sickness,” the doctors’ report reads. Last month Christian groups in Latvia welcomed fundamentalist US preachers and to the country and talked tactics about opposing gay rights. A meeting organised by Janis Vanags, Archbishop of the Latvian Evangelical Lutheran Church, was attended by Cardinal Pujats and representatives of the Orthodox, Penecostals and other Christian groups. They were addressed by Kenneth Hutcherson, who runs a ‘super-church’ in Seattle and is a vehement opponent of gay rights. He told the Latvians that homosexuality was spreading rapidly, and that the “gay lobby” had increasing political influence across the world. “We need to do everything to ensure that even in the European Union it does not lose its principles. “It is a holy right of any nation to decide in what society to live,” he told the assembled crowd, which included senior MPs. Latvia joined the EU in 2004. Mayor of London Ken Livingstone has pledged his support for the Riga Pride event, and London Pride has twinned with Riga as a show of solidarity. Last year the march was attacked and missiles and human excrement were thrown at participants. Gay and lesbian protesters were refused permission to march in Riga on the 22nd July 2006 by city officials, who cited security advice from the interior ministry. A group of around 50 activists held a service of tolerance at a local Anglican church. A gang of neo-Nazi skinheads, ultra-nationalists and members of the Orthodox church besieged the church, pelting the activists with excrement. It was reported that local police stood and watched as events unfolded and declined to intervene. The new Mayor of the Latvian capital has publicly backed the 2007 gay rights march in the city in June. In an interview with Diena newspaper last month Janis Birks said he was ashamed at events last year and called for tolerance and understanding on all sides. “The problem is not in the march but sexual orientation,” said Mr Birks. “We need to have discussion within society. What happened on the side of sexual minorities and the other side, I think we need understanding from both sides.” Mr Birks said that if security could be provided, the march could go ahead. Ken Livingstone, welcomed his Latvian counterpart’s comments, but urged Riga authorities to do more to protect gay people on the march. “Security is something that is under the control of the authorities,” said Mr Livingstone. “It is their duty to ensure that demonstrators are able to exercise their right to peaceful protest.” The Cardinal’s call to arms is bound to impact on the security situation at Riga Pride. Telling Catholics that “we cannot keep quiet,” he concluded: “I can add that during this time, the faithful must not be passive. They must be witnesses of God, sufficiently active to defend their Christian values in a licentious world. Not with weapons, but with their position. Dec 05 2022 26 LGBTQ+ couples we were rooting for but whose break-ups really, really hurt “Not just at worship services, but in civilian life. For all Christians whose faith is a matter of the heart, and for all others who love their families – you must be prepared to go out into the streets, not to create disorder, but to offer a disciplined position in support of the government, because on this very important issue of morals, the government is on the side of Christians.” Related articles Religion Apr 29 2025 The leading contenders to be the next pope, and where they stand on LGBTQ+ rights Religion Apr 21 2025 Pope Francis dies age 88, leaving behind a complicated record on LGBTQ+ issues Religion Apr 09 2025 What does the Bible say about homosexuality? Well, for starters, Jesus wasn’t a homophobe World Dec 23 2024 These countries all scored major wins for LGBTQ+ rights in 2024 History Mar 24 2024 The long, fascinating, hard-fought history of the journey to marriage equality in the UK Latest News Previous Next Celebrity Sep 25 Trans influencer calls out Nikki Glaser for stand-up joke about what’s ‘in her pants’ Culture Sep 25 Trans pro wrestling trailblazer Gisele Shaw signs exclusive NWA contract Bisexual Sep 25 The Traitors star Freddie Fraser’s mum’s emotional response to his coming out Celebrity Sep 25 Lili Reinhart says Hollywood ‘too afraid’ to greenlight lesbian vampire project Celebrity Sep 25 Carly Rae Jepsen describes moment Heated Rivalry inspired her son’s name Celebrity Sep 25 John Green ‘heartbroken’ for trans Harry Potter fans as he talks JK Rowling Current Affairs Sep 25 JD Vance claims James Talarico has a “weird obsession with children in drag” News Sep 25 Susan Sarandon, Hannah Einbinder and Caleb Hearon detained outside UN after protesting Netanyahu What to buy now Previous Next Fashion Mar 27 Connor Ives and MAC team up to re-release the iconic ‘Protect The Dolls’ t-shirt Music Mar 12 The Pussycat Dolls confirm reunion with new single and tour – how to get tickets Music Jan 23 A full guide to the 2026 Harry Styles Together, Together tour including dates and presale info Shopping Nov 24 2025 Ten truly awesome Christmas gifts you can buy to support queer-owned businesses Trans Sep 09 2025 Lush creates ‘luxurious’ trans flag bath bomb to support trans charities Tickets Jun 25 2025 Dolly Parton announces mini Las Vegas residency after wrapping her last tour almost a decade ago Shopping May 15 2025 LEGO celebrates late gay icon Keith Haring with new art set: ‘Want this so bad’ Music Apr 18 2025 Primavera Sound’s most iconic queer performances, from Troye Sivan to Ethel Cain Exclusive Previous Next Exclusive Sep 11 Ania Magliano talks SNL UK season two and anti-LGBTQ voices in comedy: ‘We do edgy in the right way’ Exclusive Sep 11 Elliot Tuttle on Blue Film’s personal inspiration, rejection and taboo: ‘It’s about loneliness’ Exclusive Sep 09 OF star Andy Lee on love for gay fans, ‘poisonous’ creators and ‘harmful’ stunts: ‘Gay men lift me up every day’ Exclusive Sep 07 Real Housewives of London spill the tea: ‘She’d go to the opening of a packet of crisps’ Opinion Sep 04 Katseye in London: A showcase of real talent deserving of the deafening screams Exclusive Sep 02 Adrian Chiarella and Joe Bird on tackling conversion therapy in gay horror Leviticus Exclusive Aug 21 Sziget Festival drag and circus troupe want audiences to feel like family Exclusive Aug 20 Gay wrestler Anthony Bowens says Heated Rivalry shows authentic life of closeted athletes Register to save articles and more. It'll only take a minute and it's free. JOIN US TODAY! Already have an account? Log in here "/> Download the PinkNews app Award winning LGBTQ+ journalism About us Editorial Policy Contact us Advertise Work for us Terms and conditions Privacy policy Privacy manager Privacy Manager