Libyan 'Gay' Men Face Torture, Death By Militia: Report (GRAPHIC) | HuffPost Voices Skip to Main Content × Main Menu U.S. Edition News U.S. News World News Business Environment Health Social Justice Crime Politics Congress Extremism Opinion Entertainment Culture & Arts Media Celebrity TV & Film Sports Life Wellness Travel Tech Food & Drink Style & Beauty Family Relationships Money Home & Living Work/Life Shopping Voices Black Voices Queer Voices Latino Voices Indigenous Voices Asian Voices Women's Voices Voices of Disabled People HuffPost Personal Games Horoscopes Video Newsletters International U.S. U.K. España France Ελλάδα (Greece) Italia 日本 (Japan) 한국 (Korea) Follow Us Terms | Privacy Policy Part of HuffPost News. ©2026 BuzzFeed, Inc. All rights reserved. × Loading comments... What's Hot 21 Years of The Huffington Post NEWS POLITICS ENTERTAINMENT LIFE SHOPPING PERSONAL VOICES GAMES Keep Us Loud When the free press comes under fire, HuffPost doesn't back down. Stand with independent journalism — become a member today. Join HuffPost Already a member? Log in to hide these messages. This article is more than 14 years old. See today’s top stories here. Libyan 'Gay' Men Face Torture, Death By Militia: Report (GRAPHIC) LOOK: 12 Men Accused Of Being Gay Face Torture, Death By Libya's Militia Nov 26, 2012, 12:43 PM EST Leave a Comment Update on November 27 at 9:15am ET : The original website which reported this story, a Facebook page for a "Human Rights Watch Libya," has changed its name and issued an apology for misrepresenting itself. The page now reads "Human Rights Libya" and states: "A letter of apology to the organization Human Rights Watch I'm the admin on this page and I'm not under the supervision of the organization Human Rights Watch I've only quoting the name of their home and read it a non-profit organization Quote name on this basis And you now I change the name of Human Rights Watch and Libya to the Human Rights Libya" Though countless media outlets have covered this story, it is now unclear if it played out as stated by Human Rights Libya. According to a disturbing report out of Libya, an extremist militia is threatening to mutilate and execute 12 allegedly gay men. (WARNING: graphic images) Gay Star News reports that the 12 men, whose names were not provided, were having a private party in a Tripoli suburb when they were captured Nov. 22. Photos which allegedly show the men in captivity have since been posted to Facebook , where they were reportedly described by members of the militia as the "third sex," which is frequently used in the Arab Gulf region to describe gays. Advertisement Further details were relatively scarce, but Human Rights Watch Libya identified the group as Al-Nawasi militia, know for championing Salafist jihad. The photos have received a number of violent comments from readers, including "Flog them hard," and "Let them see bullets," according to Gay Star News. Check out the disturbing photos as seen on Facebook below: Related Libya global gay rights Gay Rights lgbt rights queer voices Go to Homepage Leave a Comment Suggest a correction | Submit a tip Advertisement From Our Partner From Our Partner HuffPost Shopping's Best Finds Loading... Newsletter Sign Up The Morning Email Wake up to the day's most important news. Sign up for HuffPost's Morning Email. Successfully Signed Up! Realness delivered to your inbox By entering your email and clicking Sign Up, you're agreeing to let us send you customized marketing messages about us and our advertising partners. You are also agreeing to our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy . Close Trending In Queer Voices More In Queer Voices NEWS POLITICS ENTERTAINMENT LIFE VOICES HUFFPOST PERSONAL SHOPPING NEWSLETTERS About Us Advertise Contact Us RSS FAQ Careers User Agreement Comment Policy DMCA Policy Accessibility Statement Privacy Policy Consent Preferences Privacy Settings Part of HuffPost News. ©2026 BuzzFeed, Inc. All rights reserved. The Huffington Post