Grenada | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Grenada At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Legal Gender Recognition Possible? No LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? Yes Last Update: March 12, 2026 Consensual same-sex sexual conduct is criminalized in Grenada under Sections 430 and 431 of the criminal code . Section 430 prohibits the commission of “any grossly indecent act,” while Section 431 prohibits engaging in an “unnatural crime.” Grenada does not have antidiscrimination legislation that protects LGBTIQ people. During Grenada’s most recent Universal Periodic Review (UPR) at the UN Human Rights Council, civil society organizations shared that LGBTIQ people in Grenada continue to experience discrimination in many aspects of their lives, including housing and accommodation, education, employment, and public services. LGBTIQ persons experience and continue to be at risk of harassment, threats of violence , and acts of physical and sexual violence. A UPR submission by the civil society organization GrenChap notes that LGBTIQ people often receive little relief from the state when they report violations of their rights due to the inadequate protective legal framework and the failure of police officers to take reports of rights violations seriously. It further notes that the fear of being prosecuted for same-sex sexual conduct inhibits LGBTIQ people from reporting rights violations to the police. In 2024, GrenCHAP reported the discriminatory impacts of the lack of legal gender recognition on transgender people in the country, facilitating societal discrimination. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International