Guam becomes first US territory to recognise same-sex marriage | Same-sex marriage (US) | The Guardian Skip to main content Skip to navigation Close dialogue 1 / 1 Next image Previous image Toggle caption Print subscriptions Search jobs Sign in Eur Europe edition UK edition US edition Australia edition International edition The Guardian - Back to home The Guardian News Opinion Sport Culture Lifestyle Show more Hide expanded menu News View all News World news UK news Climate crisis Ukraine Environment Science Global development Football Tech Business Obituaries Opinion View all Opinion The Guardian view Columnists Cartoons Opinion videos Letters Sport View all Sport Football Cricket Rugby union Tennis Cycling F1 Golf US sports Culture View all Culture Books Music TV & radio Art & design Film Games Classical Stage Lifestyle View all Lifestyle Fashion Food Recipes Love & sex Health & fitness Home & garden Women Men Family Travel Money Search input google-search Search Support us Print subscriptions Search jobs Holidays Digital Archive Guardian Licensing Live events About Us The Guardian app Video Podcasts Pictures Newsletters Today's paper Inside the Guardian Guardian Weekly Crosswords Wordiply Corrections Tips Search input google-search Search Search jobs Holidays Digital Archive Guardian Licensing Live events About Us World Europe US news Americas Asia Australia Middle East Africa Inequality Global development Loretta Pangelinan, right, and her fiancee, Kathleen Aguero, 28, brought a lawsuit in April, after they were denied a marriage license in Guam Photograph: Grace O. Garces Bordallo/AP View image in fullscreen Loretta Pangelinan, right, and her fiancee, Kathleen Aguero, 28, brought a lawsuit in April, after they were denied a marriage license in Guam Photograph: Grace O. Garces Bordallo/AP Same-sex marriage (US) This article is more than 11 years old Guam becomes first US territory to recognise same-sex marriage This article is more than 11 years old Friday hearing resolves lawsuit brought by couple in April Same-sex couples will be able to marry from Tuesday Associated Press in Hagatna, Guam Fri 5 Jun 2015 13.34 CEST Last modified on Sun 7 Oct 2018 00.15 CEST Share Prefer the Guardian on Google Rick Santorum says supreme court gay marriage decision is not the 'final word' Read more Guam on Friday became the first US territory to recognise gay marriage, after a federal judge struck down the prohibition. US district court chief judge Frances M Tydingco-Gatewood issued the decision after a hearing on Friday morning local time. It was scheduled to go into effect at 8am on Tuesday, when gay couples will be able begin applying for marriage licenses, the Pacific Daily News reported. Attorneys representing the government of Guam said in an 18 May court document that “should a court strike current Guam law, they would respect and follow such a decision”. Loretta Pangelinan and Kathleen Aguero filed the lawsuit in April after the 28-year-old women were denied a marriage license. They based their lawsuit on a ninth US circuit court of appeals decision last year in favour of same-sex marriage. The US district court of Guam falls under the 9th circuit. Attorneys for the Guam plaintiffs had argued the territory must fall in line with the ninth circuit decision and accept marriage license applications unless the US supreme court rules otherwise. The supreme court is expected to rule this month whether gay marriage is a constitutional right. Currently, gay couples can marry in 36 states, the District of Columbia and now, Guam. Lawyers for Guam governor Eddie Calvo and the Office of Vital Statistics registrar said making a decision when a ruling from the high court was imminent was impractical. Guam attorney general Elizabeth Barrett-Anderson appointed an attorney to represent Calvo because they did not agree on the lawsuit; she was in favour of issuing licenses. Calvo has said the island’s same-sex marriage law is “being challenged by federal judges that were nominated by a US president and confirmed by a US Senate, none of whom were elected through a process that included the people of Guam”. Guam residents are US citizens, but they do not have the right to cast ballots for president. The territory elects a delegate to the US House, but the delegate may not vote on legislation. Guam has no representation in the US Senate. Explore more on these topics Same-sex marriage (US) LGBTQ+ rights Americas US constitution and civil liberties Law (US) news Share Reuse this content Comments ( … ) Sign in or create your Guardian account to join the discussion Most viewed Most viewed World Europe US news Americas Asia Australia Middle East Africa Inequality Global development News Opinion Sport Culture Lifestyle Original reporting and incisive analysis, direct from the Guardian every morning Sign up for our email About us Help Complaints & corrections Contact us Tip us off SecureDrop Privacy policy Cookie policy Tax strategy Terms & conditions All topics All writers Newsletters Digital newspaper archive Bluesky Facebook Instagram LinkedIn Threads TikTok YouTube Advertise with us Search UK jobs Tips Accessibility settings Work with us Back to top © 2026 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. (dcr)