What About Trans Rights? Taiwan’s Ongoing Struggle for Self-ID – Taiwan Insight Skip to content Twitter Facebook Instagram LinkedIn Taiwan Insight The online magazine of the Taiwan Research Hub Home About Politics Economy Environment Regular contributors Contact Past Special Issues Current Special Issue: Feeling Taiwan What About Trans Rights? Taiwan’s Ongoing Struggle for Self-ID 25 February 2026 NGA Shi Yeu Gender Leave a comment Written By Ricarda Rodenas Image credit: Reproduced from an online article originally published on Them, August 28, 2024. All rights remain with the original author, Samantha Riedel, and photographer I-Hwa Cheng . Introduction According to the Ministry of the Interior’s executive order issued in 2008, a person must undergo sex-reassignment surgery (SRS) to change their legal gender. This requirement blocks an estimated 90 per cent of transgender people from obtaining national identification that matches their gender identity. Therefore, every aspect of daily life that requires ID, from registering at a clinic to passing through airport security, becomes a potential site of distress and discrimination. Since 2013, the Ministry of Health and Welfare has recognised that gender self-identification and determination are human rights that must be respected. It recognises the freedom to be oneself and is supported by many long-recognised rights , including the rights to freedom of speech, equality, privacy, identity, dignity, and to live and act with integrity. Therefore, gender identity is a deeply personal and intimate part of a person’s selfhood; it shouldn’t be mandated by surgical requirements that individuals may not have the time, money, support, or desire to go through. Moreover, transgender individuals in Taiwan “ embody ” their gender identity through various forms of bodily expression that are independent of their sexed bodies. The requirement of SRS simplifies the transgender experience as a search for the ‘correct’ physical appearance. It negates the lives of non-binary and gender non-conforming people; if they were permitted to change their legal gender, what type of surgery would be adequate? A national ID card that doesn’t match a person’s gender identity is a daily burden that weighs heavily in the pockets and purses of transgender people. Despite the recognition that gender self-identification is a human right, there has yet to be substantive reform of the Ministry of the Exterior’s executive order. This scenario is especially puzzling, given that Taiwan is known for its strong civil mobilisation, which secured marriage equality and positioned it as a regional leader on LGBTQ+ rights. Therefore, why are transgender people still denied the right to self-identification in the years following the legalisation of same-sex marriage in 2019? The Pro-Gender Movement The Taiwan Alliance to Promote Civil Partnership Rights (TAPCPR) has long pursued legal and policy reform on gender and sexuality issues. Notably, their litigation contributed to Judicial Yuan Interpretation No. 748 in 2017, which paved the way for marriage equality in 2019. The same strategic toolkit has now been mobilised to contest the surgery requirement, resulting in several plaintiffs, including Xiao E. and Wu Yuxuan, successfully challenging administrative decisions that require proof of surgery to secure legal gender recognition. Xiao E successfully legally changed gender after an appeal supported by TAPCPR. Image credit: reproduced from an online article originally published by TAPCPR, December 22, 2021. While this strategy remains inaccessible to most transgender people, lacking the time, money, or support for a lengthy appeal, these victories still set an important precedent. It highlights the inequality transgender citizens must battle against to be recognised and the need for legal change in the abolition of the MOI executive order, as well as an administrative policy shift that recognises and supports the right to gender self-expression across all government bodies. Like the TAPCPR, the Taiwan Tongzhi Hotline Association (TTHA), the oldest and largest LGBTQ+ organisation in Taiwan, actively opposes gender discrimination. TTHA employs a grassroots and intersectional approach to mobilise internal support. For example, in 2025, TTHA organised its seventh TransMarch , which attracted approximately 3,500 attendees. Beyond its internal mobilisation, TTHA has also worked to increase external awareness and understanding of trans rights. For example, in 2022, the TTHA co-hosted the EU-Taiwan LGBTI Human Rights Conference , which focused on strengthening protections for transgender and intersex rights by facilitating exchanges among officials, academic experts, and civic representatives. This conference exemplifies TTHA’s role as a driving force behind “ Tongzhi diplomacy “, also known as queer diplomacy, a type of softpower strategy that aims to enhance Taiwan’s international image as a liberal democracy and beacon of human rights in Asia through the advancement of LGBTQ+ rights. However, there has been a shift in the international community, notably a rise of populism in the West, and along with it an increase in anti-transgender views. For example, a 2024 report by the ILGA-Europe shows a stark rise in anti-LGBTQ+ and, in particular, transphobic statements from politicians across Europe. Therefore, as Western countries increasingly embrace anti-trans sentiment, Taiwan’s positioning as an LGBTQ+ rights leader becomes paradoxically less advantageous, weakening the strategic value of queer diplomacy compared to what it was during the marriage equality era. Overall, TAPCPR and TTHA continue to organise and secure meaningful advances for trans rights. Their effort and strategy clearly explain the substantial gap in administrative change for same-sex marriage. However, their struggle alludes to other obstacles, such as a changing international environment that could reflect at-home perceptiveness to transgender struggles. The Countermovement Groups such as No Self-ID Taiwan and the Taiwan Women’s Association (TWA) have diverged from the previous countermovement to the marriage equality era. Instead of a traditionally conservative framing steeped in religious and traditional values, these groups have adopted what appears to be a progressive stance by presenting transgender rights as a threat to democracy and feminism. This strategy seeks to divide support bases that have historically been aligned with the advancement of LGBTQ+ rights. TWA founder Jaclynn Joyce , who has expressed support for same-sex marriage and even attended Pride events, simultaneously crowns herself as the “ Queen of the anti-gender movement ”. She predominantly argues that the recognition of transgender persons endangers women’s safety, particularly in single-sex spaces, and encroaches on the rights women have worked hard to secure. This aligns with a gender-critical feminist viewpoint, also known as Trans-Exclusionary Radical Feminist (TERF), which defines womanhood primarily through biological sex, thereby excluding transgender women from feminist discourse and advocacy. Jaclynn Joyce exemplifies how actors within the countermovement may have experience operating in progressive arenas, which enables these groups not only to borrow tactics from social justice movements but also to act more proactively, framing their cause in progressive language while simultaneously opposing LGBTQ+ rights. For example, No Self-ID Taiwan started an online misinformation campaign , using faulty research methods to suggest that more than 90% of Taiwanese people support proof of surgery to legally change their gender. Since social media algorithms act as an echo chamber, these fabricated statistics circulate unchecked within anti-trans circles, gaining false credibility and appearing to reflect genuine public opinion. The countermovement also aligns with the rising populist movement. No Self-ID Taiwan’s slogan—“ calling a deer a horse ” (指鹿為馬, a Han Chinese idiom meaning to deliberately distort reality)—reflects their belief that trans “lobbies” are overriding public opinion and common logic, and so undermining democratic decision-making. This echoes core populist rhetoric that the ‘people’ are being ruled by a corrupted and unnatural ‘elite;’ the risks of this framing have already been visible in the mainstreaming of transphobic policy. For example, Trump’s recent discriminatory Executive Orders enacted within days of returning to office demonstrate how quickly anti-trans rhetoric can translate into policy when populist frames dominate discourse. TWA and No Self-ID constitute an increasingly organised online force. They have evolved by adopting tactics from progressive movements while simultaneously deploying anti-trans populist rhetoric. However, without substantial offline mobilisation, such as mass demonstrations or workshops organised by the TACPR, the countermovement’s capacity to meaningfully shape the broader public and national policy is questionable. The 2024 Election Both victories and losses marked the election for the pro-gender movement. For example, President Lai Ching-te didn’t make gender and sexuality rights a major part of his platform, unlike his predecessor, Tsai Ing-wen. However, in 2023, he became the most senior government official to attend Taipei Pride. This distinction highlights symbolic over substantive representation because Lai Ching-te clearly demonstrates his support for the LGBTQ+ community in bright rainbow colours, yet makes no concrete administrative pledges, such as reforming the Sex Reassignment Surgery (SRS) executive order. Lai Ching-te (centre) marching in the 2023 Taiwan Pride parade. Image credit: reproduced from President Lai Ching-te’s official Facebook , October 28, 2023. Pridewatch found that in the 2024 election, more LGBTQ+-friendly candidates both ran and won seats than in the previous cycle. However, Pridewatch’s metrics assess only the general openness of politicians to LGBTQ+ issues, which doesn’t necessarily entail a proactive agenda on transgender rights, further exemplifying merely symbolic support. A concrete stance did make its way into third-party politics . The Greens (GPT) nominated Abby Wu , Taiwan’s first transgender woman, to run for the Legislative Yuan and made “defending bodily autonomy for people of all genders” a part of their party platform. On the other hand, the Taiwan Solidarity Union firmly positioned itself as the only political party against abolishing compulsory surgery for changing one’s legal gender. This highlights how an election campaign that explicitly includes trans rights is deemed too niche or risky for the broader public by the mainstream parties (DPP and KMT). Especially considering that economic issues were at the forefront of voter concerns, transgender rights were effectively sidelined in the 2024 election. Conclusion After legalising same-sex marriage in 2019, Taiwan has been heralded as a beacon of democracy in Asia, assuming a path dependency for the progression of trans rights. However, out of the 37 countries that both recognise same-sex marriage and allow gender marker changes, Taiwan is the only nation that enforces SRS to change one’s legal gender. While longstanding LGBTQ+ organisations that fought for marriage equality continue to pursue transgender legal recognition through litigation and community initiatives, they face unprecedented obstacles. The countermovement has evolved into a foreboding presence alongside the global rise of populism, though it remains confined to internal online spheres. Finally, the results of the 2024 election indicate that trans rights are not at the forefront of the political agenda. Ultimately, trans rights are perceived as a minority issue and are unlikely to achieve the same level of national and international visibility as marriage equality. Yet this stalled progress must be seen not as inevitable but as unjust. Trans rights are not a topic to be debated or pursued when politically convenient; they are lived realities experienced by real people. To live freely without discrimination in one’s gender identity is a human right. It is vital that the requirement for surgery to change one’s legal ID is abolished. Ricarda Rodenas graduated from SOAS University of London in 2025 with a BA (Hons) in International Relations. During their undergrad, they received a First in the module ‘Elections, Gender and Social Movements in Taiwan,’ taught by Professor Dafydd Fell. Share this: Email a link to a friend (Opens in new window) Email Share on X (Opens in new window) X Share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window) WhatsApp Share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window) LinkedIn Like this: Like Loading… Related LGBTQ Social movement Transgender Post navigation Previous Post: Asymmetric Scholarship Paradox in India–Taiwan Relations Next Post: TAIPEI’S AND NEW TAIPEI’S POSSIBLE VOLCANIC THREATS Leave a Reply Cancel reply Follow us via email Enter your email address to follow this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email. Email Address Follow Join 1,088 other subscribers About us The Taiwan Research Hub is a research centre based at the University of Nottingham focusing on all aspects of contemporary Taiwan. The Taiwan Research Hub does not privilege political positions and the views published on Taiwan Insight are those of the author and not the institute. Contact If you are interested in writing for Taiwan Insight, please contact: Dr Chun-Yi Lee Taiwan Research Hub Director and Taiwan Insight Editor in Chief Taiwan Studies Programme School of Politics and International Relations University of Nottingham University Park Nottingham NG7 2RD Chun-yi.Lee@nottingham.ac.uk Team members: Adrian Chiu Taiwan Insight Editor Mandy Felton Taiwan Insight Manager Mark Murphy Taiwan Insight Editor Shi Yeu Nga Taiwan Insight Editor Chee-Hann Wu Taiwan Insight Editor Archives Archives Select Month August 2026 July 2026 June 2026 May 2026 April 2026 March 2026 February 2026 January 2026 December 2025 November 2025 October 2025 September 2025 August 2025 July 2025 June 2025 May 2025 April 2025 March 2025 February 2025 January 2025 December 2024 November 2024 October 2024 September 2024 August 2024 July 2024 June 2024 May 2024 April 2024 March 2024 February 2024 January 2024 December 2023 November 2023 October 2023 September 2023 August 2023 July 2023 June 2023 May 2023 April 2023 March 2023 February 2023 January 2023 December 2022 November 2022 October 2022 September 2022 August 2022 July 2022 June 2022 May 2022 April 2022 March 2022 February 2022 January 2022 December 2021 November 2021 October 2021 September 2021 August 2021 July 2021 June 2021 May 2021 April 2021 March 2021 February 2021 January 2021 December 2020 November 2020 October 2020 September 2020 August 2020 July 2020 June 2020 May 2020 April 2020 March 2020 February 2020 January 2020 December 2019 November 2019 October 2019 September 2019 August 2019 July 2019 June 2019 May 2019 April 2019 March 2019 February 2019 January 2019 December 2018 November 2018 October 2018 September 2018 August 2018 July 2018 June 2018 May 2018 April 2018 March 2018 February 2018 January 2018 December 2017 November 2017 October 2017 September 2017 August 2017 July 2017 April 2017 December 2016 November 2016 September 2016 August 2016 July 2016 Categories Categories Select Category 2024 Election Series agriculture 2022 Animals Anthropology Asian Media Between Generations Culture and society Architecture Art Care Cinema Entertainment Family film fisheries food Gender Housing Indigenous issues Journalism Language Law LGBTQ Literature Media Museum Music Philosophy Popular culture Religion Buddhism Interfaith Spirituality Society Sport Taiwanese Cinema Theatre Tourism Transport violence Youth Defence Maritime Demography Demographic challenges Migration Movement Population in Taiwan Digital Humanities Disabilities and Society disaster ecology Biodiversity Economy Agriculture Asian tigers Business FDI industry Inequality innovation Labour Political economy Trade Education Studying Abroad education 2020 Environment Climate Change ecology Soundscape Energy Geography natural disasters Families2020 Featured Content fea g0v Health Covid-19 Mental health public health World Health Organisation History Colonialism Homelessness Indigenous knowledge inequality infrastructure lgbtq Malaysia Medical migrant workers Mobility Mythology Outlying Islands Politics Corruption Democracy Diplomacy Domestic Elections Elections 2020 Elections 2024 Foreign policy Human rights identity International relations Australia New Southbound Policy Taiwan-Africa Nigeria Taiwan-Asia China Cross-Strait South Asia India Taiwan-East Asia Hong Kong SAR Japan Pacific region Singapore South China Sea South East Asia Malaysia The Philippines Taiwan-EU Taiwan-CEE Taiwan-Latin America Taiwan-Turkey Taiwan-UK Taiwan-Ukraine Taiwan-US Taiwan-US-China Taiwan-Vatican Local governments Myanmar Spring Revolution Policy psychoanalysis psychotherapy Public Safety Regular contributors Brian Hioe Chieh-Chi Hsieh Gerrit van der Wees Ian Inkster Isabelle Cheng J. Michael Cole John F. Copper Joseph Bosco Mark Wenyi Lai Meng Kit Tang Milo Hsieh Qi Dongtao Ratih Kabinawa Sam Robbins Sheng-mei Ma Timothy Rich Translated By Sam Robbins Yu-Hua Chen Reproduction Searching for Taiwan’s Flavour Security Cybersecurity Defence Military semiconductors Social movement Sunflower 2022 Taiwan EATS 2021 Yushan Forum Taiwan 2022 Taiwan Studies EATS Taiwan-Philippines-Feb2021 Taiwan-Vietnam Taiwanese Americans TCM Tea Teaching Technology Artificial Intelligence digital The Housing Market UK-Taiwan Uncategorized Water White Terror Collaborators Type your email… Subscribe Share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window) LinkedIn https://www.facebook.com/UoNTaiwanResearchHub Powered by WordPress.com . Discover more from Taiwan Insight Subscribe now to keep reading and get access to the full archive. Type your email… Subscribe Continue reading Loading Comments... Write a Comment... Email (Required) Name (Required) Website %d