Gender self-identification | Brussels-Capital Region Skip to main content All themes en Identity, Nationality ID’s, naturalization and official documents Gender self-identification Belgium simplifies the change of gender on the identity card in Brussels. Audience : Residents, specifically transgender people in Brussels Cost : Changing the gender on an identity card is free of charge Duration : 3 to 6 weeks to obtain a new identity card Documents : Valid identity document, medical certificate, possibly a judicial or administrative decision Mode : Digital Language : FR/NL Gender reassignment is an important step for transgender people seeking recognition of their gender identity. In Belgium, the Brussels-Capital region offers a procedure for changing the sex registration on identity cards. The procedure: To change the sex registration in the Brussels-Capital Region, here are the steps to follow: Make an appointment with the commune where you are registered in the Brussels-Capital Region. Prepare the documents you need to prove your identity, nationality and gender reassignment request. These documents may vary depending on your personal situation. In general, you will need to provide a valid identity document, a medical certificate attesting to a sex change, and possibly a judicial or administrative decision. Go to your appointment in person and give the documents to the local authority official responsible for the procedure. He or she will explain the steps to be taken and provide you with a form to fill in. Fill in the form and sign it. You will need to provide details of your new identity, including gender. The form will be sent to the local authority's Population Department, which will examine your request. If it is accepted, the change will be registered and your new identity card will be issued. Rates and processing times may vary from one commune to another in the Brussels-Capital Region, but in general, changing the gender on an identity card is free of charge in Belgium. The time taken to process a gender reassignment request may vary depending on the municipality and the complexity of your case. In general, it takes around 3 to 6 weeks to obtain a new identity card. Note that the exact procedures may vary depending on your individual situation. For example, if you are a minor, you will need to obtain the consent of your parents or legal guardians. If you are a foreign national, you will need to provide additional documents to prove your identity and residency status. We recommend that you contact your local council for information specific to your situation. For more information, please consult the following websites: Opens in new window Institute for the Equality of Women and Men (belgium.be) Opens in new window New regulations for transgender people - Federal Public Service Justice (belgium.be) Access your municipality's website List of municipalities Select Anderlecht Auderghem Berchem-Sainte-Agathe City of Brussels Etterbeek Evere Forest Ganshoren Ixelles Jette Koekelberg Molenbeek-Saint-Jean Saint-Gilles Saint-Josse-ten-Noode Schaerbeek Uccle Watermael-Boitsfort Woluwe-Saint-Lambert Woluwe-Saint-Pierre IRISbox Show more Do you have any questions, complaints, suggestions, reports about this page? Give feedback on this page Opens in a new window Back to top Themes About the Region Transport, Mobility Housing Taxes, Funding, Grants Security, Prevention International, Europe Identity, Nationality Employment Environment, Waste Leisure, Events, Sports Aid, Social Services, Health Entrepreneurship, Innovation, Scientific Research Education, Teaching, Science Promotion Urban Development Terms and conditions Privacy policy Accessibility statement Cookie policy Contact Cookie settings Copyrights 2026 , Paradigm.brussels