Bhutan prepares to repeal its anti-gay laws Now Reading Bhutan prepares to repeal its anti-gay laws Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate Bhutan prepares to repeal its anti-gay laws by Colin Stewart June 10, 2019 Colin Stewart Colin Stewart is a 45-year journalism veteran living in Southern… Read Next New lawyers’ group fights violence and stigma in Cameroon The Himalayan kingdom of Bhutan is close to dropping its anti-gay laws, with the lower house of parliament voting nearly unanimously to repeal the ban on “unnatural sex.” Bhutan is located between India and China east of Nepal and north of Bangladesh. (Map courtesy of Refugee-net.org) The laws, which classify the crime as a misdemeanor, call for a prison sentence of a month to a year for violators. According to news reports, they have not been enforced for at least 15 years. Reuters reports: Bhutan’s lower house of parliament votes to decriminalise homosexuality Bhutan’s lower house of parliament voted on Friday to scrap laws criminalising homosexuality, local media and activists said, becoming the latest Asian nation to take steps towards easing restrictions on same-sex relationships. The amendment to the penal code passed the 44-member National Assembly with just a single dissenting vote, the local newspapers Kuensel and The Bhutanese reported. Scrapping Sections 213 and 214 of the code, criminalising “unnatural sex” — widely read as homosexuality — still needs to be ratified by Bhutan’s upper house, the National Council, to become law. Rights groups are confident they have the support of lawmakers there. “The biggest advantage we have with our current government is that they have already worked with us and they are well aware of our issues,” Tashi Tsheten, the director of LGBT+ activist group Rainbow Bhutan told Reuters. “This is our first journey towards equality.” … Earlier this year, ILGA’s “State-Sponsored Homophobia” report for 2019 reported: Logo of Rainbow Bhutan In Bhutan, Tashi Tsheten, an activist from Rainbow Bhutan, in an interview said there is a renewed momentum and hope within Bhutan’s clandestine LGBTI community since the 2018 national election, which saw a center-left political party come into power. He claimed the LGBTI movement has gained significant momentum in recent years and has led to more public conversation around the issues. The International Day Against Homophobia, Biphobia and Transphobia was celebrated in 2018 for the third consecutive time and was widely reported in local media. See Also LGBTI+ rights activists in Turkey seek international support during crackdown According to Tsheten, for the first time ever, one of the political parties, BKP, included the rights of LGBTI people in their manifesto for the general election of 2018. A marriage bill with gender neutral pronoun was placed during the 2018 summer parliamentary session but has been deferred due to the election. And now with the new government in place, Tsheten and the community believes that the conversation around the bill will be revived. … The country is largely Buddhist, and religious leaders have mostly come out in support of the LGBT community…. In 2013, the introduction of Facebook led to increased visibility for the LGBT community with the creation of dedicated Facebook groups for the community.8 In 2014, Rainbow Bhutan was set up as a community for LGBT people with five members; this grew to more than 100 members in 2018. … In 2014, the anti-corruption minister Dasho Neten Zangmo said in an address to high school students that “romantic relationships, by the way, can be boy-boy or girl-girl.” Colin Stewart June 10, 2019 The Latest Posts Turkey’s anti-LGBT crackdown expands; activists fight back Proposed Ukraine law would expand ban on anti-LGBTQ discrimination A third of LGBTQ groups say 2025’s drastic cuts will force them to close Bangladesh activists launch petition to end anti-LGBTQ discrimination Uganda’s ‘Not Free’ rating partly due to anti-LGBT laws Appeal to Indonesia to stop listing ‘LGBTQ culture’ as a national threat LGBTI+ rights activists in Turkey seek international support during crackdown Analysis: Cameroon’s anti-gay raids violated Cameroon’s own rules Ghana’s £10m deal is dead; gay fans won’t be lured to homophobic nation Turkey: 162 targeted in anti-LGBTQ+ raids Roundup: After Brunei win, will George Clooney target Indonesia? Previous Article New lawyers’ group fights violence and stigma in Cameroon Next Article View Comments (0) Leave a Reply Cancel reply Your email address will not be published. Name * E-mail * Website Notify me of new posts by email. Δ Related Posts Rightify Ghana trains dozens of queer youth leaders in advocacy Longtime Jamaican activist celebrates long-term marriage ‘We do not support criminalisation’ — Anglican archbishop in Ghana Ugandan trans pastor honored at WorldPride Amsterdam Cameroon: Freed from prison, 3 women go into business — with readers’ help Under attack in Russia, trans support group still racks up successes About The Erasing 76 Crimes news site covers the human toll of 66+ countries’ anti-gay laws and the struggle to repeal them. Member Members of the African Human Rights Media Network publish news articles and other media that educate readers about sexual minorities’ struggle for recognition of their human rights. Partner The St. Paul’s Foundation for International Reconciliation promotes LGBTQ+ rights through fact-based advocacy journalism and community projects. (California charity 80-0647355) © 2026 Erasing 76crimes. All rights reserved. Scroll To Top Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate Facebook Twitter Instagram Discover more from Erasing 76 Crimes Subscribe now to keep reading and get access to the full archive. Type your email… Subscribe Continue reading PRESS ESC TO CLOSE