South Korea: Trans soldier's death prompts calls for reform About Us Advertise Work with us Login Register Latest News View all UK US World Health Politics Sport Business Culture View all TV Film Celebrity Drag Theatre Music Gaming Lifestyle View all Beauty Careers Fashion Relationships Travel Shopping View all Deals Recommended Fashion & Beauty Tickets Video View all News & Politics Entertainment Lifestyle Discover Trans Awareness Week Drag Race Explainers The Queer Agenda Toggle menu Account Register Login News South Korea told to ‘bear responsibility’ for trans soldier’s death and end LGBT+ discrimination Mar 04 2021 Written by Maggie Baska Share Save for later Comment Byun See-Hoo, the first trans soldier in the South Korean military, lost a reinstatement appeal in 2020. She was found dead in her home in Cheongju, South Korea on 3 March 2021. (YouTube/Yonhap News Agency/Korea Now) After the death of South Korean former soldier and trans woman Byun Hee-soo, authorities have been urged to bring forward more protections for LGBT + people. Byun was found dead on Wednesday (3 March), just over a year after she was discharged from the army for undergoing gender affirmation surgery. Her untimely death prompted an outpouring of grief and calls for South Korea to protect its LGBT+ citizens by enacting anti-discrimination protections. One post on the web portal Daum read: “The whole of Korean society bears responsibility for her death,” and called on those who made transphobic comments about Byun to reflect on their actions. Seo Ji-hyun, a prosecutor who triggered South Korea’s # MeToo movement by going public over sexual harassment she suffered at the hands of her superior, wrote South Korea “could have saved” Byun. “We could have saved her … We just had to let her live life true to who she was,” Seo said, according to the South Morning China Post, and called for an anti-discrimination bill “right now. An anti-discrimination bill was proposed on 29 June, 2020, which would include protections for LGBT+ people. The bill would ban favouritism based on sex, race, age, sexual orientation, disability or religion as well as several more unusual criteria such as criminal history, appearance and academic background. This is the eighth time that a bill on anti-discrimination has been submitted to the National Assembly since 2007. In past attempts, the inclusion of provisions outlawing LGBT+ discrimination was especially contentious. Tributes for Byun Hee-soo, trans soldier found dead in South Korea Following Byun’s death, the National Human Rights Commission issued a statement honouring Byun’s “fight against deep-rooted discrimination and hatred” and vowed to keep going with efforts to improve the system for LGBT+ people in South Korea. Transgender youth group Tulip Solidarity promised to keep fighting for equality in South Korea, according to the Wall Street Journal . In a letter posted to their blog on Thursday (4 March), some 50 trans teens who interacted with Byun vowed to keep her memory alive in their work. “We will not fear the path toward change that Staff Sgt Byun opened up for all transgender youth,” the group wrote. Less emphatic were the words of the Ministry of National Defense, which offered condolences on Thursday (4 March). Colonel Moon Hong-sik, the ministry’s deputy spokesperson, said at a press briefing : “We express our sympathy.” Byun, who was a tank gunner in Gyeonggi province, north of Seoul, was discharged from the army after undergoing gender affirmation surgery in January last year . She launched a landmark legal challenge against the South Korean army over her dismissal, but this was rejected in July. Emergency services were alerted by a mental health counsellor that Byun had not been reachable since Sunday (28 February), according to South Korean news agency Yonhap. According to official reports, firefighters found her dead at her house in Cheongju, south of Seoul at 5.49pm on Wednesday (3 March). The local mental health care clinic said Byun attempted suicide three months ago, according to Yonhap . No suicide note was found, and police are investigating the death. A door cordoned by police line is seen at the home of late transgender South Korean soldier Byun Hee-soo in Cheongju on 4 March 2021. Byun, who was forcibly discharged from the army after gender-reassignment surgery, has been found dead, police said, prompting anger and calls for legal reforms. (Photo by HONG YOON-GI/AFP via Getty Images) South Korea remains a deeply conservative country over matters of sexual identity and LGBT+ rights. Byun’s death has triggered an outpouring of grief and calls for the South Korean government to pass an anti-discrimination bill that would protect LGBT+ people. Sunday (28 February) would have been Byun’s last day in the military if she had been allowed to stay in the service. A woman, who said she had been Byun’s friend since they attended a military high school together seven years ago, told Reuters her friend was “destined to be a soldier”. Kim, requesting only her surname be used due to privacy issues, said: “A military nerd, she was so knowledgeable about all things military, not just Korean troops but those in other countries, and worked so hard to restart her service.” She added that Byun had been jobless because all of her job applications were rejected since she went public when the military discharged her in January 2020. Byun had been awaiting a trial to reverse the military decision to ban her from service. Moon also said that the military has not been in discussion on a rule change for transgender candidates. More: South Korea Trans Queer News. Straight Up. The LGBTQ+ stories you don’t want to miss, delivered to your inbox daily. Email address required Must be valid email Register By registering you agree to our Privacy Policy Thanks for registering! You can update your email subscriptions at any time in the My profile section of your account. Dec 05 2022 26 LGBTQ+ couples we were rooting for but whose break-ups really, really hurt Related articles Music Apr 01 Eurovision launches Asia edition with South Korea and Thailand among entries Asia Mar 05 South Korea approves creating a trans rights foundation after two-year row Asia Oct 22 2025 South Korea officially recognises same-sex couples in national census Asia Jul 14 2025 Viral post claims North Korea is ‘offering LGBT memberships’. Here are the facts… TV May 02 2025 South Korea’s first-ever lesbian dating show is already bringing the drama, both on and off-screen Latest News Previous Next Celebrity Sep 25 Trans influencer calls out Nikki Glaser for stand-up joke about what’s ‘in her pants’ Culture Sep 25 Trans pro wrestling trailblazer Gisele Shaw signs exclusive NWA contract Bisexual Sep 25 The Traitors star Freddie Fraser’s mum’s emotional response to his coming out Celebrity Sep 25 Lili Reinhart says Hollywood ‘too afraid’ to greenlight lesbian vampire project Celebrity Sep 25 Carly Rae Jepsen describes moment Heated Rivalry inspired her son’s name Celebrity Sep 25 John Green ‘heartbroken’ for trans Harry Potter fans as he talks JK Rowling Current Affairs Sep 25 JD Vance claims James Talarico has a “weird obsession with children in drag” News Sep 25 Susan Sarandon, Hannah Einbinder and Caleb Hearon detained outside UN after protesting Netanyahu What to buy now Previous Next Fashion Mar 27 Connor Ives and MAC team up to re-release the iconic ‘Protect The Dolls’ t-shirt Music Mar 12 The Pussycat Dolls confirm reunion with new single and tour – how to get tickets Music Jan 23 A full guide to the 2026 Harry Styles Together, Together tour including dates and presale info Shopping Nov 24 2025 Ten truly awesome Christmas gifts you can buy to support queer-owned businesses Trans Sep 09 2025 Lush creates ‘luxurious’ trans flag bath bomb to support trans charities Tickets Jun 25 2025 Dolly Parton announces mini Las Vegas residency after wrapping her last tour almost a decade ago Shopping May 15 2025 LEGO celebrates late gay icon Keith Haring with new art set: ‘Want this so bad’ Music Apr 18 2025 Primavera Sound’s most iconic queer performances, from Troye Sivan to Ethel Cain Exclusive Previous Next Exclusive Sep 11 Ania Magliano talks SNL UK season two and anti-LGBTQ voices in comedy: ‘We do edgy in the right way’ Exclusive Sep 11 Elliot Tuttle on Blue Film’s personal inspiration, rejection and taboo: ‘It’s about loneliness’ Exclusive Sep 09 OF star Andy Lee on love for gay fans, ‘poisonous’ creators and ‘harmful’ stunts: ‘Gay men lift me up every day’ Exclusive Sep 07 Real Housewives of London spill the tea: ‘She’d go to the opening of a packet of crisps’ Opinion Sep 04 Katseye in London: A showcase of real talent deserving of the deafening screams Exclusive Sep 02 Adrian Chiarella and Joe Bird on tackling conversion therapy in gay horror Leviticus Exclusive Aug 21 Sziget Festival drag and circus troupe want audiences to feel like family Exclusive Aug 20 Gay wrestler Anthony Bowens says Heated Rivalry shows authentic life of closeted athletes Register to save articles and more. It'll only take a minute and it's free. JOIN US TODAY! Already have an account? Log in here "/> Download the PinkNews app Award winning LGBTQ+ journalism About us Editorial Policy Contact us Advertise Work for us Terms and conditions Privacy policy Privacy manager Privacy Manager