Transgender activists in Guyana are fighting against archaic laws | PinkNews About Us Advertise Work with us Login Register Latest News View all UK US World Health Politics Sport Business Culture View all TV Film Celebrity Drag Theatre Music Gaming Lifestyle View all Beauty Careers Fashion Relationships Travel Shopping View all Deals Recommended Fashion & Beauty Tickets Video View all News & Politics Entertainment Lifestyle Discover Trans Awareness Week Drag Race Explainers The Queer Agenda Toggle menu Account Register Login Current Affairs Transgender activists in Guyana are fighting against archaic laws Mar 26 2017 Written by Meka Beresford Share Save for later Comment Transgender activists in Guyana are fighting against transphobic laws that have led to the trans community become used to dealing with daily abuse and violence. The push to beat transphobia in the country comes after a trans resident in the capital of the country, Georgetown, encountered abuse and found it near impossible to seek justice. Petronella Trotman was attacked my a young man who stabbed her in the neck with a pair of scissors because he believed Trotman had “disrespected her”. Queer News. Straight Up. The LGBTQ+ stories you don’t want to miss, delivered to your inbox daily. Email address required Must be valid email Register By registering you agree to our Privacy Policy Thanks for registering! You can update your email subscriptions at any time in the My profile section of your account. Trotman told the BBC that after the initial attack the man ran but came back quickly to carry on attacking her with glass bottles. “It happens a lot here in Guyana to transgender women. We live in a very homophobic society,” she said. The attack spurred Trotman to seek conviction but realised that an arctic 124 year old law that criminalised “cross-dressing” stood in her way. When attempting to appear in court, Trotman was told that she must “dress like a man” by the magistrate Dylon Bess. Her dress was seen as a violation of law, a factor that led to the eventual dismissal of the case because magistrates would not let her testify as a female. Magistrate Bess tried to defend the move, calling it a “preference and not a requirement” but insisted that parliament should abolish to outdated law, not the courts. Since hearing about the case, local LGBT groups in Georgetown and the rest of the country are pushing to have the old law overturned. Some are even calling for magistrates to aide in taking down the law. Joel Simpson, the managing director at Guyana’s Society Against Sexual Orientation Discrimination (SASOD) said Bess had demonstrated a “dereliction of duty”. “While he is a magistrate not a judge, the court does have the power to declare that a particular law is unconstitutional… Where there’s conflict, the constitution prevails,” Simpson said. The fight to raise awareness for trans communities was initially sparked several years ago in 2010 after a number of trans activists were arrested for wearing female clothing. In conjunction with SASOD, the Guyana Trans United (GTU) group launched a challenge in the Supreme Court against the cross-dressing law. Much to their dismay, the case felt through when Ian Chang, the chief justice at the time, ruled that cross-dressing was legal unless done for an “improper purpose” – a term he did not define. Now, the two advocacy groups believe that they are left with limited options and so they are turning to mass petitions and protests. “Our next step is to continue to have protests, let our voices be heard and then to get a petition before parliament,” founder of GTU, Quincy McEwan, said. Dec 31 2024 Every celebrity who came out as LGBTQ+ in 2024 “And we’re not stopping there. We’re going to appeal our matter before the Caribbean Court of Justice.” More: activism Americas Equality Guyana guyana Law LGBT Protection Trans Transgender transphobia Related articles Activism May 21 2023 Overturning British colonial-era ‘buggery’ law ‘first step’ to protecting LGBTQ+ people in Guyana Current Affairs Nov 14 2018 Court strikes down Guyana anti-transgender law Trans Jun 22 2018 H&M apologises after staff stop transgender woman from trying on swimsuit Current Affairs Jun 04 2018 Activists take to streets for Guyana’s first LGBT Pride parade Culture Jan 23 2018 Transphobe Germaine Greer defends Harvey Weinstein in vicious attack against #MeToo movement Latest News Previous Next Celebrity Sep 25 Trans influencer calls out Nikki Glaser for stand-up joke about what’s ‘in her pants’ Culture Sep 25 Trans pro wrestling trailblazer Gisele Shaw signs exclusive NWA contract Bisexual Sep 25 The Traitors star Freddie Fraser’s mum’s emotional response to his coming out Celebrity Sep 25 Lili Reinhart says Hollywood ‘too afraid’ to greenlight lesbian vampire project Celebrity Sep 25 Carly Rae Jepsen describes moment Heated Rivalry inspired her son’s name Celebrity Sep 25 John Green ‘heartbroken’ for trans Harry Potter fans as he talks JK Rowling Current Affairs Sep 25 JD Vance claims James Talarico has a “weird obsession with children in drag” News Sep 25 Susan Sarandon, Hannah Einbinder and Caleb Hearon detained outside UN after protesting Netanyahu What to buy now Previous Next Fashion Mar 27 Connor Ives and MAC team up to re-release the iconic ‘Protect The Dolls’ t-shirt Music Mar 12 The Pussycat Dolls confirm reunion with new single and tour – how to get tickets Music Jan 23 A full guide to the 2026 Harry Styles Together, Together tour including dates and presale info Shopping Nov 24 2025 Ten truly awesome Christmas gifts you can buy to support queer-owned businesses Trans Sep 09 2025 Lush creates ‘luxurious’ trans flag bath bomb to support trans charities Tickets Jun 25 2025 Dolly Parton announces mini Las Vegas residency after wrapping her last tour almost a decade ago Shopping May 15 2025 LEGO celebrates late gay icon Keith Haring with new art set: ‘Want this so bad’ Music Apr 18 2025 Primavera Sound’s most iconic queer performances, from Troye Sivan to Ethel Cain Exclusive Previous Next Exclusive Sep 11 Ania Magliano talks SNL UK season two and anti-LGBTQ voices in comedy: ‘We do edgy in the right way’ Exclusive Sep 11 Elliot Tuttle on Blue Film’s personal inspiration, rejection and taboo: ‘It’s about loneliness’ Exclusive Sep 09 OF star Andy Lee on love for gay fans, ‘poisonous’ creators and ‘harmful’ stunts: ‘Gay men lift me up every day’ Exclusive Sep 07 Real Housewives of London spill the tea: ‘She’d go to the opening of a packet of crisps’ Opinion Sep 04 Katseye in London: A showcase of real talent deserving of the deafening screams Exclusive Sep 02 Adrian Chiarella and Joe Bird on tackling conversion therapy in gay horror Leviticus Exclusive Aug 21 Sziget Festival drag and circus troupe want audiences to feel like family Exclusive Aug 20 Gay wrestler Anthony Bowens says Heated Rivalry shows authentic life of closeted athletes Register to save articles and more. It'll only take a minute and it's free. JOIN US TODAY! Already have an account? Log in here "/> Download the PinkNews app Award winning LGBTQ+ journalism About us Editorial Policy Contact us Advertise Work for us Terms and conditions Privacy policy Privacy manager Privacy Manager