National frameworks to address hate crime in Norway | HCRW Skip to main content Search English Русский Main navigation Home About us ODIHR's mandate ODIHR's methodology Sitemap FAQs Hate Crime Report Racist and xenophobic hate crime Anti-Roma hate crime Anti-Semitic hate crime Anti-Muslim hate crime Anti-Christian hate crime Other hate crime based on religion or belief Gender-based hate crime Anti-LGBTI hate crime Disability hate crime ODIHR's Tools Civil Society Participating States Image Albania Image Andorra Image Armenia Image Austria Image Azerbaijan Image Belarus Image Belgium Image Bosnia and Herzegovina Image Bulgaria Image Canada Image Croatia Image Cyprus Image Czech Republic Image Denmark Image Estonia Image Finland Image France Image Georgia Image Germany Image Greece Image Holy See Image Hungary Image Iceland Image Ireland Image Italy Image Kazakhstan Image Kyrgyzstan Image Latvia Image Liechtenstein Image Lithuania Image Luxembourg Image Malta Image Moldova Image Monaco Image Mongolia Image Montenegro Image Netherlands Image North Macedonia Image Norway Image Poland Image Portugal Image Romania Image Russian Federation Image San Marino Image Serbia Image Slovakia Image Slovenia Image Spain Image Sweden Image Switzerland Image Tajikistan Image Türkiye Image Turkmenistan Image Ukraine Image United Kingdom Image United States of America Image Uzbekistan National frameworks to address hate crime in Norway This page provides information on the national frameworks to address hate crime in Norway. The information provided here should be viewed alongside data presented on Norway's hate crime report page . Hate crime recording and data collection Hate crimes are defined as criminal offences motivated by hatred or negative attitudes directed towards a person or group due to their ethnicity, religion, belief, sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression, or disability. In Norway, any type of criminal offence motivated by the aforementioned grounds can be considered a hate crime. The term encompasses hateful and discriminatory speech, but also violence and threats, criminal damage, incitement to a criminal offence, and reckless behaviour, such as stalking a person or violating their peace. The police in Norway record all hate crimes reported to them. Recording happens through manual coding. The police record criminal cases based on the victim's perception. If the victim does not recognize the possible bias motivation but the investigator does, a flagging option is used in the system to record a hate crime. If recorded correctly, the case is prioritized by the police and the prosecution, according to guidelines in place since 2018. Hate crime cases are flagged in the police system when first registered. Since recording is done manually by police officers, some cases might not be flagged initially. It is also possible to flag a case later, for example, by the investigator or the prosecutor. The police co-operate with other agencies if necessary. The National Hate Crime Unit publishes an annual report that shows how many of the registered hate crime cases ended up in court. The annual report consists of statistics of all registered hate crime cases in Norway from the last year, along with some analysis of the numbers. There is no hate crime policy or guidance document for prosecutors and the judiciary. However, the Attorney General publishes an annual circular letter where they announce which types of crime should be given priority by the police and the prosecution authorities in the next year. The guidelines and prioritization circulars of the Public Prosecutor's Office (published since the early 2000s) state that hate crimes should be prioritized regardless of severity. All cases falling within the priorities set by the Public Prosecutor's Office should be given precedence in cases of limited resources. Therefore, it is clear that hate crime cases should be prioritized by all police districts. Hate crime statistics for different police districts in Norway are regularly published . Oslo Metropolitan University conducts bi-annual crime victimization surveys, which include questions about hate crime, with the aim of measuring unreported hate crimes. The last published report (for 2020) is available here . The survey shows that hate crimes are largely underreported. Hate crime victim support Norway offers both general and specialized support to victims of hate crime. Services are provided both by state-run institutions and civil society organizations. There is a dedicated hate crime unit in the police, the National Hate Crime Expertise Unit, formerly the Oslo Police District Hate Crime Unit. Every police district in the country has a focal point within this unit, and police actively reach out to vulnerable communities. The police have integrated victim support centres in all police districts. The centres can be contacted by victims even if a criminal case has not been registered. The police can also refer victims to the centres in connection with recorded criminal cases. The staff in these centres are social workers and provide assistance with counselling as well as with filling out compensation claims. In addition, Oslo Police District has its own "safety programme" to follow up on victims of crimes that occur in public spaces. The police inform the victim about the investigation and its developments, and set up direct contact between the victim and a dedicated police officer. There is no established individual needs assessment process. The police, however, use a technique of investigative interviewing (the so-called "Kreativ" model) that promotes communication, legal protection, ethics, empathy, active listening, and trust through openness. Specialized service providers for victims of hate crimes are not integrated into the general victim support scheme in a systematic way. However, there is ongoing co-operation between the police and civil society. If necessary, the police may decide to refer a victim to a specialized civil society support provider. The police offer special protection measures to vulnerable victims, including victims of hate crime, as part of the "Safety programme". Such special protection measures include maintaining telephone contact, meeting with the victim, and accompanying the victim in public, including at the crime scene. All crime victims can use the counselling services offered by the police. As a party to a criminal case, hate crime victims can apply for access to the case documents. A lawyer will assess whether any case documents should be classified during the criminal proceedings. The prosecutor also highlights the hate motive and how this affects the victim in court. Restorative justice is used in some cases, where the offender wishes to apologize, and the victim wishes to meet the offender. Hate crime capacity building In 2021, the Norwegian Police established the National Hate Crime Expertise Unit. The group is part of the Oslo Police District and is a reinforcement of the Oslo Police District's hate crime unit. The mandate of the National Hate Crime Expertise Unit is to build the capacities of the police districts in the field through training and guidance and, if necessary, to provide assistance in specific cases. In 2022, the capacity-building work of the Unit was endorsed by the Chief of Police in all police districts and all police districts established a hate crime focal point. The National Hate Crime Expertise Unit prepared training for dedicated police officers to later cascade it to their own police districts in line with the training-of-trainers approach. The training focuses on correctly recognizing and recording hate crimes to ensure they are prioritized in line with the Attorney General's annual circular letter. The training also focuses on the impact of hate crimes on individuals, communities and society. The training content emphasizes the importance of follow-up with the victim and draws on an ODIHR video on "Placing Victims at the Heart of Hate Crime Response", among other materials. The National Hate Crime Expertise Unit are following up on work conducted in 2022 in 2023 with regular digital meetings. The Oslo Police District's Hate Crime Unit provides training on hate crime investigation to the Hellenic police as part of an EEA project implemented from 2023 to 2024. This unit has also developed mandatory training videos for all investigators. These videos cover both the investigation of hate crime cases and a broader understanding of the phenomenon. Contact Us Email tndinfo@odihr.pl Tel +48 22 520 06 00 Fax +48 22 520 06 05 OSCE Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) Tolerance and Non-Discrimination Department Ul. Miodowa 10 00-251 Warsaw, Poland Footer ODIHR ODIHR contacts OSCE About OSCE websites Terms of service Log In Username Password Reset your password