BILL NO. 60
Republic of the Philippines
BANGSAMORO PARLIAMENT
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao
BARMM Compound, Cotabato City
BANGSAMORO TRANSITION AUTHORITY
(SECOND REGULAR SESSION)
BANGSAMORO AUTONOMY ACT NO. 13
Begun and held in Cotabato City, on Friday, the 29th day of March, 2019.
AN ACT
PROVIDING FOR THE BANGSAMORO ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
AND FOR OTHER RELATED PURPOSES
Be it enacted by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority in Parliament assembled:
INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS
Code.”

Sec. 1. Title. - This Act shall be known and cited as the “Bangsamoro Administrative

Sec. 2. Purpose. - This Code is promulgated to prescribe the structural, functional and
procedural principles and rules of governance of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim
Mindanao.
Sec. 3. Declaration of Principles and Policies. - The Bangsamoro Government hereby
declares the following principles and policies as the basic foundation of the Code:
a. The Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao is an autonomous regional
government with asymmetrical relationship with the Republic of the Philippines and shall
be parliamentary in form. Its political system is democratic, and all government authority
resides in the people who have the right, in accordance with law, to freely participate in
the political processes;
b. The Bangsamoro Government recognizes and protects the customs and traditions, beliefs,
and cultures of its indigenous inhabitants. The right of indigenous peoples to a just and
equal treatment shall be protected. They shall be free from all forms of discrimination,
oppression and exploitation;
c. The Bangsamoro Government recognizes the vital role of women and youth, and the
valuable contributions of differently abled persons in nation-building and shall promote
and protect their physical, moral, spiritual, intellectual, cultural and social well-being. It
shall inculcate in the minds of the youth patriotism and nationalism, and encourage their
involvement in public and civic affairs;
d. The Bangsamoro Government shall ensure every citizen in its territorial jurisdiction the
provision of the basic necessities and equal opportunities in life. Social justice shall be
Page 1

e.
f.

g.

h.
i.
j.
k.

promoted in all aspects of life and phases of development in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region;
The Bangsamoro Government shall promote unity, peace, justice, and goodwill among all
peoples, encourage a just and peaceful settlement of disputes and adopt the generally
accepted principles of international law;
The Bangsamoro Government, its offices, agencies, including Government -Owned and
-Controlled corporations (GOCCs) shall ensure full respect for human rights. In the
performance of its duties and responsibilities, offices, agencies, including GOCCs shall
include human rights protection and promotion in the formulation and implementation of
plans, programs, projects and activities;
The Bangsamoro Government shall ensure the autonomy of its constituent local
government units (LGUs), without prejudice to the former’s authority to regulate the
latter’s affairs for good governance guaranteed under the Organic Law and Bangsamoro
Local Government Code. The privileges already enjoyed by local government units under
Republic Act No. 7160, otherwise known as the “Local Government Code of 1991,” as
amended, and other existing laws shall not be diminished;
The Bangsamoro Government shall develop a self-reliant and independent regional
economy and patrimony that are responsive to the needs of the Bangsamoro people, and
effectively controlled by the Bangsamoro;
The Bangsamoro Government shall encourage the participation of non-governmental,
community-based, and sectoral organizations in government affairs that promote the
welfare of the region and its people;
The Bangsamoro Government, in pursuit of moral governance, shall maintain honesty,
integrity, transparency and accountability, participation in governance and take positive
and effective measures against graft and corruption; and
Subject to reasonable conditions prescribed by law, the Bangsamoro Government adopts
and implements a policy of full public disclosure of all its transactions involving public
interest;

Sec. 4.

Definition of Terms. - The words in this Code are defined as follows:

“Asymmetrical Relationship” refers to a relationship with the national government that
is unlike those of other regions, having powers which other administrative regions do not
exercise, and a structure that is likewise different from the said regions. In the case of the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region, the asymmetry is reflective of the recognition of the
distinct Bangsamoro identity and their aspiration for self-governance;
"Bangsamoro Government” refers to the corporate governmental entity with all the
powers granted to it by the Constitution, Bangsamoro Organic Law and other statutes, as well
as those necessary for, or incidental to, the governance of the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region in Muslim Mindanao, including the Bangsamoro Parliament, Bangsamoro
Government of the Day, and various instrumentalities through which political authority is
exercised;
“National Government” refers to the entire machinery of the central government, as
distinguished from the different levels of local governments;
“Bangsamoro Autonomous Region" used interchangeably herein with the
“Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao” refers to the autonomous region
Page 2

established by virtue of Republic Act No. 11054, also known as the “Organic Law for the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao”;
“Bangsamoro Organic Law” refers to Republic Act No. 11054, also known as the
“Organic Law for the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao”, the purpose
of which is to establish a political entity, provide for its basic structure of government in
recognition of the justness and legitimacy of the cause of the Bangsamoro People and their
aspirations and all indigenous cultural communities in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region
in Muslim Mindanao to secure their identity and posterity, allowing for meaningful
self-governance within the framework of the Constitution and the national sovereignty as
well as territorial integrity of the Republic of the Philippines;
"Local Government" refers to the constituents units of the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region in Muslim Mindanao, such as the component provinces, cities, municipalities,
barangays and such other political subdivisions established by law or in accordance with the
Bangsamoro Organic Law;
"National agency" refers to a unit of the National Government;
"Ministry" refers to a cabinet portfolio in the Bangsamoro Government exercising
executive authority, created by the Bangsamoro Organic Law and those that may be created
by law passed by the Parliament;
"Office" refers within the framework of governmental organization, to any major
functional unit of the Bangsamoro Government or its ministries. It may also refer to any
position held or occupied by individual persons whose functions are defined by law;
"Instrumentality" refers to any agency of the Bangsamoro Government, not integrated
within the ministry framework vested with special functions or jurisdiction by law, endowed
with some if not all corporate powers, administering special funds, and enjoying operational
autonomy, usually through a charter. This term includes regulatory agencies, chartered
institutions and government-owned or -controlled corporations;
“Government of the Day” refers to the Cabinet headed by the Chief Minister, and
composed of other Ministers appointed by him, majority of whom shall also be Members of
the Parliament, that exercises executive authority in the Bangsamoro Government. The
Government of the Day, during the transition period, is the Moro Islamic Liberation
Front–led majority with the participation of the Moro National Liberation Front (MNLF) and
other Members of the Bangsamoro Parliament who voted for the latter’s leadership therein;
“Popular Initiative” refers to the process whereby a bill is proposed directly by the
people as part of participatory democracy in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region;
"Bangsamoro Government-Owned or -Controlled Corporation" refers to any agency
organized as a stock or non-stock corporation, vested with functions relating to public needs
whether governmental or proprietary in nature, and owned by the Bangsamoro Government
directly or through its instrumentalities either wholly, or, partly, subject to the applicable
provisions of existing Corporation Laws;
Page 3

"Officer" as distinguished from "clerk" or "employee", refers to a person whose duties,
not being of a clerical or manual nature, involves the exercise of discretion in the
performance of the functions of the government. When used with reference to a person
having authority to do a particular act or perform a particular function in the exercise of
governmental power, "officer" includes any government employee, agent or body having
authority to do the act or to exercise that function;
"Employee", when used with reference to a person in the public service, includes any
person in the service of the government or any of its agencies, divisions, subdivisions or
instrumentalities;
“Khalifa” refers to a human as a vicegerent, trustee, steward of Allah (Subhannahu
Wa’ Taalah) on earth;
“Contracts” refer to written or unwritten agreements/meeting of the minds between two
or more persons or juridical entities;
“Regular Non-Working Holidays” are those national and regional holidays provided
by law, which are observed throughout the area of autonomy;
“Special Holidays” refer to non-regular holidays in the region and certain local
government units in observance of historical, religious and other significant events which
need official proclamation from the Chief Minister;
“Settler Communities” refer to those who are not native inhabitants of the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region, but who came to permanently reside therein as part of the
Philippine Government’s resettlement programs or who voluntarily opted to migrate thereto,
as well as their descendants who continue to reside in the Bangsamoro;
“Non-Moro Indigenous Peoples/Non-Moro Indigenous Cultural Communities”
refer to a group of people or homogenous societies identified by self-ascription and ascription
by others, who have continuously lived as organized community on communally bounded
and defined territory, and who have, under claims of ownership since time immemorial,
occupied, possessed and utilized such territories, sharing common bonds of language,
customs, traditions and other distinctive cultural traits, or who have, through resistance to
political, social and cultural inroads of colonization, non-indigenous religions and cultures,
became historically differentiated from the majority of Filipinos. ICCs/IPs shall likewise
include peoples who are regarded as indigenous on account of their descent from the
populations which inhabited the country, at the time of conquest or colonization, or at the
time of inroads of non-indigenous religions and cultures, or the establishment of present state
boundaries, who retain some or all of their own social, economic, cultural and political
institutions, but who may have been displaced from their traditional domains or who may
have resettled outside their ancestral domains. They do not ascribe to the Moro identity;
“Moral Governance” refers to the set of rules, practices, and processes completely
devoid of all the evils of graft and corruption, and explicitly driven by the moral principles of
utmost dedication, devotion, honesty, justice, and integrity;

Page 4

“Bangsamoro Parliament” refers to the body in which the powers of government is
vested and shall have legislative authority to enact laws on matters that are within the powers
and competencies of the Bangsamoro Government.
BOOK I
BANGSAMORO AUTONOMY AND ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1
The Bangsamoro Autonomous Region
Sec. 1. Bangsamoro People. - Those who, at the advent of the Spanish colonization, were
considered natives or original inhabitants of Mindanao and the Sulu archipelago and its adjacent
islands, whether of mixed or full blood, shall have the right to identify themselves, their spouses and
descendants, as Bangsamoro.
Sec. 2. Bangsamoro Territory. - The territorial jurisdiction of the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region shall be composed of:
A. The provinces of Basilan, Lanao del Sur, Maguindanao, Sulu, and Tawi-Tawi;
B. The cities of Cotabato, Lamitan, and Marawi; and
C. The 63 barangays that opted for inclusion in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region,
during the plebiscite called for such purpose, namely:
1. Dunguan and Tapodoc, all in Aleosan, Cotabato;
2. Kibayao, Kitulaan, Langogan, Manarapan, Nasapian, Pebpoloan, and Tupig, all in
Carmen, Cotabato;
3. Buluan, Nanga-an, Pedtad, Sanggadong, Simbuhay, Simone, and Tamped, all in
Kabacan, Cotabato;
4. Damatulan, Kadigasan, Kadingilan, Kapinpilan, Kudarangan, Central Labas, Malingao,
Mudseng, Nabalawag, Olandang, Sambulawan, Tugal, and Tumbras, all in Midsayap,
Cotabato;
5. Lower Baguer, Balacayon, Buricain, Datu Binasing, Datu Mantil, Kadingilan,
Libungan Torreta, Matilac, Lower Pangangkalan, Upper Pangangkalan, Patot, and
Simsiman, all in Pigkawayan, Cotabato;
6. Bagoinged, S. Balong, S. Balongis, Barungis, Batulawan, Bualan, Buliok, Bulol, Fort
Pikit, Gli-Gli, Gokotan, Kabasalan, Lagunde, Macabual, Macasendeg, Manaulanan,
Nabundas, Nalapaan, Nunguan, Pamalian, Panicupan, and Rajahmuda, all in Pikit,
Cotabato; and
7. Any province, city, municipality, barangay or geographic area that may opt to join
through any legal process.
Sec. 3. Constituent Units. - The constituent units of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region are
provinces, cities, municipalities, barangays, and geographical areas within its territorial jurisdiction.
Sec. 4. Inland Waters. - All inland waters such as lakes, rivers, river systems, and streams
within its territorial jurisdiction form part of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region inland waters.
The preservation and management of the inland waters shall be under the Bangsamoro Government
as provided for in Section 22, Article XIII of the Bangsamoro Organic Law.
Sec. 5. Bangsamoro Municipal and Regional Waters. - The municipal and regional waters
of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region shall extend up to fifteen (15) kilometers and nineteen (19)
Page 5

kilometers, respectively, from the low-water mark of the coasts that are part of the Bangsamoro
territorial jurisdiction.
Where a constituent local government unit of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region and an
adjoining local government unit are so situated on opposite shores such that there is thirty (30)
kilometers of waters or less between them, a line equally distant from the opposite shores shall be
drawn to demarcate the Bangsamoro waters and the municipal waters of the adjoining local
government unit.
In case the constituent local government unit of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region and an
adjoining local government unit are so situated on opposite shores that there is more than thirty (30)
kilometers but less than thirty-four (34) kilometers of waters between them, a line shall be drawn at
the edge of the fifteen-kilometer municipal waters of the adjoining local government unit to
demarcate it from the Bangsamoro waters.
Chapter 2
Bangsamoro Symbols and Emblems
Sec. 6. Bangsamoro Flag. - The Bangsamoro flag shall be in the shape and dimension of a
standard flag, three (3) feet by five-and-a-half (5 ½) feet, and shall contain four (4) distinctive colors,
a Crescent, a seven-rayed Star, and a Kris. It shall always be regarded with utmost respect and
admiration, and shall always be displayed alongside the Philippine Flag pursuant to Section 2,
Article II of R.A. No. 11054.
Sec. 7. Bangsamoro Emblem. - The Official Bangsamoro Seal shall be circular in design.
The words ‘BANGSAMORO AUTONOMOUS REGION IN MUSLIM MINDANAO’ shall be
clearly printed at the upper portion and the same shall be preceded and ended by stars. The year of
creation of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao ‘2019’ shall be printed at the
lower portion.
The outermost part of the Official Bangsamoro Seal shall be bordered by a rope. In its center
shall be a Crescent with a Seven-rayed Star to its right.
The Rope, the Crescent, and the Seven-rayed Star shall be golden yellow in color. There shall
be a strip, slightly red in color, in the inner portion of the rope. The crescent and the star shall be set
against a green background. The words inscribed therein shall be written in green with white as its
background.
Sec. 8. Bangsamoro Hymn. - The official lyrics and rendition of the Bangsamoro Hymn shall
be in accordance with the official musical arrangement and composition embodied in Bangsamoro
Autonomy Act No. 7.
Whenever the Bangsamoro Hymn is sung, it shall always be preceded by the singing of the
Philippine National Anthem.
Sec. 9. Seat of the Bangsamoro Government. - The seat of the Bangsamoro Government
shall be in Cotabato City, unless otherwise provided by the Bangsamoro Parliament in a subsequent
law.
Page 6

Sec. 10. Bangsamoro Foundation Day. - January 21 is hereby proclaimed as the
Bangsamoro Foundation Day and declared a non-working holiday in celebration of the establishment
of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region, which shall be celebrated in recognition of the dreams and
aspiration of the people to chart their social, political, cultural and economic destiny in exercise of
their right to self-determination.
Sec. 11. Bangsamoro Legal Holidays. - Regular non-working holidays and special holidays
provided for by laws and issuances of the National Government shall be observed in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region.
The Bangsamoro Parliament shall enact a law to identify the holidays to be observed in the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region. The Chief Minister may likewise proclaim any local special
holiday for a particular date and place in accordance with existing laws and issuances.
Chapter 3
Operation and Effects of Laws
Sec. 12. Effectivity of Executive Issuances. - Executive issuances shall take effect after
fifteen (15) days following the completion of their publication in the Bangsamoro Gazette or in a
newspaper of regional circulation, unless otherwise provided.
Sec. 13. Interpretation of Laws and Administrative Issuances. - In the interpretation of a
law or an administrative issuance promulgated in all the official languages, the language used in the
original text shall control, unless otherwise specifically provided. Only in the event of ambiguity,
omission or mistake, may the other texts be consulted.
This Administrative Code shall be liberally construed in favor of giving effect to the
autonomous character of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Government.
Sec. 14. Bangsamoro Gazette. - The Bangsamoro Gazette shall be the official gazette of the
Bangsamoro Government which will publish all legislative acts and resolutions of a public nature, all
executive and administrative issuances of general application, decisions or abstracts of decisions of
the Shari’ah Courts of sufficient importance to be published, documents or classes of documents as
may be required to be published by law and such documents or classes of documents of general
application.
The Bangsamoro Gazette shall be published by the Bangsamoro Information Office (BIO) in
the English language and whenever applicable, in Filipino and Arabic. It shall be made available to
all national and local agencies upon subscription. The Bangsamoro Library and Archives shall serve
as the official custodian and repository thereof.
Ministries and all offices and agencies shall submit copies of their issuances and similar
documents to the Bangsamoro Information Office for publication.
Upon written request, the Bangsamoro Information Office shall translate the relevant
documents in Arabic in coordination with the Bangsamoro Darul Ifta’.

Page 7

Chapter 4
Legal Weights, Measures, and Periods
Sec. 15. Official Use of Metric System. - The metric system of weights and measures shall
be used in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region for all products, articles, goods, commodities,
materials, merchandise, utilities, services, as well as for commercial transactions like contracts,
agreements, deeds and other legal instruments publicly and officially attested, and for all official
documents. Only weights and measures of the metric system shall be officially sealed and licensed.
Sec. 16. Legal Periods. - “Year” shall be understood to be twelve calendar months; “month”
of thirty days, unless it refers to a specific Gregorian calendar month in which case it shall be
computed according to the number of days the specific month contains; “day” to a day of
twenty-four hours; and “night”, from sunset to sunrise.
The Gregorian calendar shall be used in the Bangsamoro alongside the Hijri Calendar. In
cases of documents requiring official dates, the Gregorian calendar date will be shown with its
counterpart Hijri date, as far as practicable.
Chapter 5
General Principles Governing Public Officers
Sec. 17. Nature of Public Office. - Public office is a sacred public trust. Public officers and
employees must at all times be accountable to God and to the people, serve as ”khalifa”, with the
utmost responsibility, integrity, loyalty and efficiency, act with patriotism and justice, and lead
modest lives.
Sec. 18. Declaration of Assets, Liabilities and Net Worth. - A public officer or employee
shall, upon assumption to office and as often thereafter as may be required by law, submit a
declaration under oath of their assets, liabilities and net worth.
Sec. 19. Ethics in Government. - All public officers and employees shall be guided by the
core values of moral governance and the Bangsamoro Civil Service Code.
Sec. 20. Liability of Superior Officers. - A public officer shall not be civilly liable for acts
done in the performance of his/her official duties, unless there is a clear showing of bad faith, malice
or gross negligence.
Any public officer who, without just cause, neglects to perform a duty within a period fixed
by law or regulation, or within a reasonable period if none is fixed, shall be liable for damages to the
private party concerned without prejudice to such other liability as may be prescribed by law; and a
head of a ministry/office/agency or a superior officer shall not be civilly liable for the wrongful acts,
omissions of duty, negligence, or misfeasance of his/her subordinates, unless s/he has actually
authorized by order the specific act or misconduct complained of.
Sec. 21. Liability of Subordinate Officers. - No subordinate officer or employee shall be
civilly liable for acts done by him in good faith in the performance of his/her duties. However, s/he
shall be liable for willful or negligent acts done by him/her which are contrary to law, morals, public
policy and good customs even if s/he acted under orders or instructions of his/her superiors.
Page 8

Chapter 6
Bangsamoro Immunity from Suit
Sec. 22. Non-suability of the Bangsamoro Government. - No suit shall lie against the
Bangsamoro Government except with its consent as provided by law.
Sec. 23. Bangsamoro Government's Responsibility for Acts of Agents. - The Bangsamoro
Government shall be legally bound and responsible by acts of its officials and duly authorized
representatives performed in accordance with the Bangsamoro Organic Law and other pertinent
laws.
It shall not be bound by the mistakes or errors of its officers or agents in the exercise of their
functions, without prejudice to any administrative, civil, and criminal liabilities in the personal
capacity of the erring or negligent officer or agent.
Chapter 7
Official Oaths
Sec. 24. Oaths of Office for Public Officers and Employees. - All public officers and
employees of the government before entering upon the discharge of their duties, shall take an oath to
uphold and defend the Constitution and the Bangsamoro Organic Law; that s/he will bear true faith
and allegiance to it; obey the laws, legal orders and decrees promulgated by the duly constituted
authorities; will faithfully discharge to the best of his/her ability the duties of the office or position
upon which s/he is about to enter; and that s/he voluntarily assumes the obligation imposed by
his/her oath of office, without mental reservation or purpose of evasion. Copies of the oath shall be
deposited with the Civil Service Commission regional office and the human resource department of
the concerned agency.
It is also mandatory to take the Oath of Moral Governance:
“I swear to the Almighty Allah (God), the Most Supreme, the Beneficent, the
Merciful, the All knowing.
I shall perform my duties and responsibilities entrusted to me as part of the
Bangsamoro Government with utmost dedication, devotion, honesty, justice,
integrity, completely devoid of all the evils of governance especially graft and
corruption.
I shall protect the legitimate rights and interest of all people in the area,
strongly fight the proliferation and use of illegal drugs and other evils of society and
endeavor to promote and sustain peace and security at all times in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region territory and in the entire country, so help me Allah (God).”
Sec. 25. Officers Authorized to Administer Oath. - The following officers have general
authority to administer oath: Wali, Bangsamoro Mufti, Chief Minister, members of the Judiciary,
Speaker of the Parliament, Cabinet Ministers, the Bangsamoro Attorney General, and Chief
Executives of local government units.

Page 9

Chapter 8
Reports
Sec. 26. Annual and Special Reports. - The heads of the ministries, offices, agencies or
instrumentalities of the Bangsamoro Government shall prepare and submit annual or special reports
to the Chief Minister who shall furnish a consolidated report to the Bangsamoro Parliament on or
before the first day of March of each year, or as may be required. The contents of the annual or
special reports shall be prescribed by law or, in the absence thereof, by executive order.
Sec. 27. Repository of Reports. - Official copies of annual reports shall be deposited with the
Bangsamoro Library and Archives and shall be accessible to the public.
BOOK II
INTERGOVERNMENTAL RELATIONS
Sec. 1. Intergovernmental Relations Body. - Pursuant to Sec. 2. Art. VI of the Bangsamoro
Organic Law, the Intergovernmental Relations Body (IGRB) is created to coordinate and resolve
issues on intergovernmental relations through regular consultation and continuing negotiation in a
non-adversarial manner.
The Cabinet shall determine who among its members shall represent the Bangsamoro
Government in the IGRB. A Special Memorandum Order shall be issued by the Chief Minister to
designate the members so chosen.
Sec. 2. Other IGR Bodies. - The following are the other IGR Bodies, whose Bangsamoro
Government representatives shall likewise be appointed or designated by the Chief Minister through
a Special Memorandum Order, unless otherwise provided in the Bangsamoro Organic Law:
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.

Philippine Congress-Bangsamoro Parliament Forum;
Intergovernmental Fiscal Policy Board;
Joint Body for the Zones of Joint Cooperation;
Intergovernmental Infrastructure Development Board;
Intergovernmental Energy Board;
Bangsamoro Sustainable Development Board; and
Council of Leaders.

Sec. 3. Council of Leaders. - The Council of Leaders shall advise the Chief Minister on
matters of governance in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region. It shall consist of the following
members:
a. Chief Minister as head of the council;
b. Members of the Congress of the Philippines from the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region;
c. Provincial governors, and mayors of chartered cities in the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region;
d. One (1) representative each from the traditional leaders, non-Moro indigenous
communities, women, settler communities, the Ulama, youth, and Bangsamoro
communities outside of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region; and
e. Five (5) sectoral representatives as provided in the succeeding section.
Page 10

The officials referred to paragraphs (a), (b), and (c) shall be ex officio in nature without the
requirement of appointment while paragraphs (d) and (e) require a selection and appointment process
as hereinafter provided.
The representation of the non-Moro indigenous communities shall be pursuant to their
customary laws and indigenous processes.
Sec. 4. Sectoral representatives to the Council of Leaders. - As provided in paragraph (e) of
the preceding section, there shall be one (1) representative each for the following sectors: (a)
professionals; (b) business; (c) private educational institutions; (d) labor sector; and (e) farmers’
sector.
Sec. 5. Selection of representatives. - The Chief Minister shall select the representatives in
paragraphs (d) and (e) of Section 3 above from a list of nominees based on the following
qualifications:
a. Residency. Representatives-nominees must be residents and registered voters of the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region, of legal age, not otherwise disqualified by law, with a
proven track record in the community or sector represented, and must be willing and able
to participate in all activities of the Council of Leaders.
b. Occupation. A nominee must not hold any government position, whether appointive or
elective and must not receive any remuneration from the government while serving as
community or sectoral representative to the Council of Leaders.
c. Nomination. The nominee must be formally nominated by a registered organization,
association, or institution of the community or sector being represented. An organization
that has government officials and employees as ex officio members of the Governing
Board or whose operations are funded by the government are disqualified. Financial
support by the government to specific projects will not be considered as funding support
to operations.
If no nominations are submitted, the Chief Minister shall select and appoint any qualified
person of the category to the vacant position.
Sec. 6. Compensation. - Sectoral Representatives shall not receive compensation except in
the form of per diems and necessary expenses in attending the meetings and activities of the Council.
Sec. 7. Term of Office. - The Sectoral Representatives shall have to be coterminous with the
appointing Chief Minister unless otherwise removed from cause.
Sec. 8. Secretariat. - The Office of the Senior Minister shall serve as the Secretariat of the
Council.
Sec. 9. Principles of Intergovernmental Relations in the Bangsamoro. - Intergovernmental
Relations (IGR) mechanisms seek the achievement of common goals through alignment and
cohesion across all levels of government. As such:
a. There should be mutual respect between the different levels of government. There must
be an unequivocal recognition of each side’s authority and accountability;
b. There must be an ethos of interdependence. Each side must see the need to cooperate and
collaborate to achieve the intended goal; and
Page 11

c. The IGR mechanism must be a platform for civic participation. Hence, there must be
space for civil society organizations to engage in the policy-making process as well as in
the implementation phase of any development program.
Sec. 10. National Government Offices and Ministries/Agencies in the BARMM. - Subject
to applicable laws, orders and/or policies, the Bangsamoro Government shall be consulted on and
resolve any National Government action that may affect matters of particular interest to the former.
For this purpose, the National Government and the Bangsamoro Government shall regularly meet,
through the IGRB, to coordinate and resolve issues on intergovernmental relations through regular
consultation and continuing negotiation in a non-adversarial manner.
Other government offices, agencies, instrumentalities, entities and government-owned or
-controlled corporations, including people’s and non-government organizations in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region which are not covered by the preceding paragraph shall be dealt with in
accordance with the applicable existing laws, policies, orders and/or such regional laws the
Parliament may enact for the purpose.
Sec. 11. Bangsamoro Government and its Constituent Local Government Units. - The
authority of the Bangsamoro Government to regulate the affairs of its constituent local government
units shall be guaranteed in accordance with the Bangsamoro Organic Law and a Bangsamoro Local
Governance Code enacted by the Parliament, which shall provide the institutional framework to
govern the relationship of the national government, the BARMM government and the LGUS within
the BARMM.
The privileges already enjoyed by local government units under Republic Act No. 7160,
otherwise known as the “Local Government Code of 1991,” as amended, and other existing laws
shall not be diminished.
Sec. 12. Exercise of Powers of the Bangsamoro Government. - The exercise of powers
granted to the Bangsamoro Government by the Bangsamoro Organic Law on matters which do not
fall under the sole jurisdiction of the National Government shall include the power of administration
and that of issuing internal regulations for the organization of the Bangsamoro Government.
BOOK III
THE BANGSAMORO AUTONOMOUS GOVERNMENT
TITLE I:
Bangsamoro Government
Sec 1. Powers of Government. -The powers of government shall be vested in the Parliament
which shall exercise those powers and functions expressly granted to it in the Bangsamoro Organic
Law, and those necessary for, or incidental to, the proper governance and development of the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region. It shall set policies, legislate on matters within its authority, and
elect a Chief Minister who shall exercise executive authority on its behalf.
Sec. 2. Legislative Authority. - The Parliament shall have the authority to enact laws on
matters that are within the powers and competencies of the Bangsamoro Government.

Page 12

Sec. 3. Executive Authority. - The executive function and authority shall be exercised by the
Cabinet which shall be headed by a Chief Minister. The Chief Minister shall be elected by a majority
vote of all the members of the Parliament.
The Chief Minister shall nominate two (2) Deputy Chief Ministers who shall be elected by
the Parliament as provided under the Bangsamoro Organic Law, and appoint the members of the
Cabinet, majority of whom shall come from the Parliament.
TITLE II:
Wali
Sec. 1. Wali.- The Wali shall serve as the ceremonial head of the Bangsamoro Government of
the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao.
The Parliament shall issue a resolution reflecting its consensus on the selection of the Wali
from a list of names of eminent residents of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region submitted by the
Council of Leaders.
Sec. 2. Qualifications.- The Wali shall possess the following qualifications at the time of his
nomination:
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.

Natural-born citizen of the Philippines;
Able to read and write in Filipino, English, or Arabic;
At least forty (40) years of age;
A resident of what now constitutes the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region for at least
fifteen (15) years; and
No prior conviction for any criminal or administrative offense by any court or
quasi-judicial body.

Sec. 3. Duties of the Wali. - The Wali shall perform the following ceremonial duties:
a. Opening the session of the Parliament;
b. Administering the oath of office of the Chief Minister, Deputy Chief Ministers, Speaker
of Parliament, Members of Parliament, and the Cabinet Ministers;
c. Dissolving the Parliament upon the advice of the Chief Minister after a vote of no
confidence against the government of the day;
d. Calling for election of a new Parliament;
e. Attending public ceremonies; and
f. Welcoming foreign and local dignitaries.
Sec. 4. Removal of the Wali. - Any member of the Parliament may initiate the move for the
removal of the Wali on any of the grounds enumerated under Section 6, Article VIII of the
Bangsamoro Organic Law and, by majority vote of its members of Parliament, proceed to hear and
determine the allegations against him.
The Bangsamoro Parliament may remove the Wali from office by ¾ vote of all its members
upon finding of commission of the enumerated acts in Section 6, Article VIII of the Bangsamoro
Organic Law, provided that the Wali shall be afforded due process. The Bangsamoro Parliament
shall promulgate the necessary rules to carry out the purpose of this section.
Page 13

The Wali may submit his resignation to the Speaker of the Bangsamoro Parliament but in no
case vacate his position without the approval of majority of the Parliament.
In case the Wali is indisposed to perform his duties for compelling reasons, the Parliament
shall designate by simple majority an Acting Wali from those originally listed to perform the duties
appurtenant to the Office of the Wali until the latter resumes the performance of his duties and
functions.
Sec. 5. Vacancy of the Position of Wali. - In case of death, permanent disability, removal
from office, or resignation of the Wali, the Parliament shall appoint a new Wali within thirty (30)
days from vacancy.
Sec. 6. Term of Office. - The Wali shall hold office for six (6) years. In case of vacancy, the
successor shall only serve the remaining unexpired term of the predecessor. The first appointed Wali
by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority shall hold office for three (3) years or until his successor
has assumed office.
Sec. 7. Prohibitions. - The Wali shall not hold any other office or employment in the
Government, or any subdivision, agency, or instrumentality thereof, including Government - owned
or controlled corporations or their subsidiaries, during his term without forfeiting his seat. The Wali
shall not engage, directly or indirectly, in any business or commercial enterprise in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region where there may be a conflict of interest in the exercise of his functions. The
Wali may not personally appear as counsel before courts of justice or quasi-judicial and other
administrative bodies within the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region. Neither shall the Wali be,
directly or indirectly, financially interested in any contract with, or in any franchise or special
privilege granted by the Bangsamoro Government, or any subdivision, agency, or instrumentality
thereof, including any government-owned or -controlled corporation or its subsidiary, during his
term of office, nor intervene in any manner before any office of the Bangsamoro Government for his
pecuniary benefit or where the Wali may be called upon to act on account of his office.
Sec. 8. Performance of Functions. - The Wali shall act independently in the performance of
his functions, and shall enjoy sufficient degree of autonomy. For this purpose, he must not receive
instructions from any person, regardless of position, regarding the exercise of his tasks.
Sec. 9. Appointments. - The Chief Minister, upon recommendation of the Wali, shall appoint
the support staff in the Office of the Wali, subject to civil service laws, rules and regulations.
Sec. 10. Divisions. - The Office of the Wali shall have the following Divisions:
a. Administrative and Finance Services Division; and
b. Protocol and Other Support Services Division.
Sec. 11. Administrative and Finance Division. - The Administrative and Finance Division
shall be responsible for the day - to - day operations of the office and shall carry out the following
functions:
a. Provide administrative support to the Office;
b. Manage the finances of the Office; and
c. Carry out other administrative functions assigned by the Wali.
Page 14

Sec. 12. Protocol and Other Support Services Division. - The Protocol and Other Support
Services Division shall have the following functions:
a. Provide the necessary arrangement for programs and ceremonial activities of the
BARMM requiring the attendance of the Wali;
b. Provide the necessary human resources for utility, food and other relevant logistical
support services for the Office; and,
c. Carry out other functions as may be assigned by the Wali.
Sec. 13. Per Diem and Allowances. - The Wali shall be entitled to receive per diems,
representation, transportation, and living allowance, and other emoluments appropriate to his stature,
in accordance with the Bangsamoro Organic Law and other regional laws, subject to the usual
government accounting and auditing principles.
The per diem shall be sourced from the funds of the Office of the Wali and shall be provided
for in the annual Bangsamoro Appropriations Act.
Sec. 14. Notice to the Wali. - All offices that will conduct public ceremonies requiring the
attendance of the Wali shall give prior written notice to the Office.
Sec. 15. Facilities. - The Bangsamoro Government shall provide adequate facilities for the
efficient functioning of the Office.
The Wali shall also be provided an official residence during his tenure with necessary
supplies and equipment deserving his stature as the ceremonial head of the Bangsamoro Government
of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao.
TITLE III:
Bangsamoro Parliament
Sec. 1. Powers of the Bangsamoro Parliament. - The Bangsamoro Parliament shall exercise
the powers granted to it under Section 5, Article VII of the Bangsamoro Organic Law.
Sec. 2. Composition. - The Parliament shall be composed of eighty (80) members, unless
otherwise increased by the Congress of the Philippines.
Sec. 3. Classification and Allocation of Seats. - The seats in the Parliament shall be
classified and allocated as follows:
(a) Party Representatives. One-half of the members of the Parliament shall be
representatives of political parties who are elected through a system of proportional representation
based on the Bangsamoro territorial jurisdiction.
Any organized group in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region may register as a political party
with the Bangsamoro Electoral Office, with qualifications to be prescribed by the Bangsamoro
Electoral Code.
Each registered political party shall submit to the Bangsamoro Electoral Office before the
election a manifestation of intent to participate in the parliamentary election of party representatives
in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region, incorporating therein a list of nominees, ranked from one (1)
Page 15

to forty (40), from which party representatives shall be chosen in case they obtain the required
number of votes. No person shall be nominated in more than one (1) list.
The Bangsamoro Electoral Code shall provide the manner of election of the reserved seats
and sectoral representatives.
Any elected party representative who changes political party affiliation during the his/her
term of office shall forfeit the seat in the Parliament: Provided, That if the elected party
representative changes political party affiliation within six (6) months before an election, s/he shall
not be eligible for nomination as party representative under the new party or organization.
Parliamentary District Seats. Not more than forty percent (40%) of the members of
Parliament shall be elected from single member parliamentary districts apportioned for the areas and
in the manner provided for by the Parliament. The allocation of the parliamentary district seats shall
be determined by the Bangsamoro Transition Authority as provided for in Section 4, Article XVI
thereof. In the allocation of district seats, the Bangsamoro Transition Authority shall adhere to the
standards set in Section 10, Article VII of the Bangsamoro Organic Law.
(b)

The Parliament may, by law, undertake new redistricting in order to ensure a more equitable
representation of the constituencies in the Parliament.
The district representatives shall be elected through direct plurality vote by the registered
voters in the parliamentary districts.
Reserved Seats and Sectoral Representatives. Reserved seats and sectoral
representatives shall constitute at least ten percent (10%) of the members of the Parliament, which
shall include two (2) reserved seats each for non-Moro indigenous peoples and settler communities.
Women, youth, traditional leaders, and the Ulama shall have one sectoral seat each: Provided, That
the reserved seats and sectoral representatives shall in no case be less than eight (8) seats.
(c)

The Parliament shall determine the manner of election of the reserved seats and sectoral
representatives.
For the first parliamentary election following the ratification of the Bangsamoro Organic Law,
the allocation of reserved and sectoral representative seats shall be determined by the Bangsamoro
Parliament as provided for in the Bangsamoro Organic Law.
Sec. 4. Election for Reserved Seats for Non-Moro Indigenous Peoples. - Notwithstanding
the immediately preceding sections, reserved seats for non-Moro indigenous peoples such as
Teduray, Lambangian, Dulangan Manobo, B’laan, and Higaonon shall be filled in accordance with
the Bangsamoro Election Code and shall adhere to their customary laws and indigenous processes
based on the following:
a. Primacy of customary laws and practices;
b. Primacy of consensus building;
c. Acceptability to the community;
d. Inclusivity and full participation;
e. Representation of the collective interests and aspirations of non-Moro indigenous peoples;
f. Sustainability and strengthening of indigenous political structures;
g. Track record and capability; and
h. Gender equality.
Page 16

Sec. 5. Regional Parties. - A free and open regional party system shall be allowed to evolve
according to the free choice of the people. Towards this end, only regional political parties duly
accredited by the Bangsamoro Electoral Office, as approved by the Commission on Elections, shall
participate in the parliamentary elections in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region. The Bangsamoro
Government shall ensure the inclusion of women’s agenda and the involvement women and the
youth in the electoral nominating process of the political parties.
Sec. 6. Term of Office. - The term of office of the Members of the Parliament shall be three (3)
years: Provided, That no member shall serve for more than three (3) consecutive terms. Voluntary
renunciation of office for any length of time or the dissolution of the Parliament by the Wali shall not be
considered as an interruption in the continuity of the service for the full term for which the member was
elected.
Sec. 7. Qualifications. - No person shall be a member of the Parliament unless the person is a
citizen of the Philippines, at least twenty-five (25) years of age on the day of the election, able to read
and write, and a registered voter in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.
A candidate for youth representative shall not be less than eighteen (18) years and not more
than thirty (30) years of age at the time of election.
A candidate for district representative must be a registered voter of the district in which the
person is a candidate, and has resided in the district for at least one (1) year immediately
preceding the day of the election.
Sec. 8. Remuneration of Members of Parliament. - Until the Parliament provides otherwise,
the remuneration of Members of Parliament shall be based on the Revised Compensation and
Position Classification System of the National Government as provided under Republic Act No.
6758, as amended, and shall consist of:
a. In the case of the Chief Minister, salaries and emoluments equivalent to Salary Grade 31;
b. In the case of the Deputy Chief Ministers and the Speaker of the Parliament, salaries and
emoluments equivalent to Salary Grade 30; and
c. In the case of Members of Parliament, salaries and emoluments equivalent to Salary Grade
29.
No increase in the compensation shall take effect until after the expiration of the full term of
all the members of the Parliament approving such increase.
Members of the Parliament shall not receive during their tenure other salary and emoluments
from the Bangsamoro Government or from the National Government.
Sec. 9. Disclosure. - Members of the Parliament shall, upon their assumption of office, make a
full disclosure of their financial and business interests, including those of their spouses and children.
They shall notify the Parliament of any potential conflict of interest that may arise from the filing of bills
or resolutions of which they are authors.
Sec. 10. Prohibition Against Conflict of Interest. - The Chief Minister, Deputy Chief Ministers,
members of the Cabinet, and members of the Parliament, during their term, shall not engage, directly
or indirectly, in any business or commercial enterprise in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region where
there may be a conflict of interest in the exercise of their functions.
Page 17

No member of the Parliament may personally appear as counsel before courts of justice or
quasi-judicial and other administrative bodies within the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region. Neither
shall a member be, directly or indirectly, financially interested in any contract with, or in any franchise
or special privilege granted by the Bangsamoro Government, or any subdivision, agency, or
instrumentality thereof, including any government-owned or -controlled corporation or its subsidiary,
during the member’s term of office, nor intervene in any manner before any office of the
Bangsamoro Government for the member’s pecuniary benefit or where the member may be called
upon to act on account of the member’s office.
Sec. 11. Prohibited Business and Pecuniary Interest. - (1) It shall be unlawful for the Chief
Minister, Deputy Chief Ministers, members of the Cabinet, and members of the Parliament to
directly or indirectly:
a. Engage in any business transaction with the Bangsamoro Government or with any of its
authorized boards, officials, agents, or attorneys, whereby money is to be paid, or property
or any other thing of value is to be transferred, directly or indirectly, out of the resources
of the Bangsamoro Government to such person or firm;
b. Hold such interests in any cockpit or other games licensed by the Bangsamoro
Government;
c. Purchase any real estate or other property forfeited in favor of the Bangsamoro
Government for unpaid taxes or assessment, or by virtue of a legal process at the instance
of the Bangsamoro Government;
d. Be a surety for any person contracting or doing business with the Bangsamoro
Government for which a surety is required; and
e. Possess or use any public property of the Bangsamoro Government for private purposes.
(2) All other prohibitions governing the conduct of national public officers relating to
prohibited business and pecuniary interest so provided for under Republic Act No. 6713 or the
"Code of Conduct and Ethical Standards for Public Officials and Employees" and other laws shall
also be applicable to the Chief Minister, Deputy Chief Ministers, members of the Cabinet, and
members of the Parliament.
Sec. 12. Practice of Profession. - (1) The Chief Minister, Deputy Chief Ministers, and
members of the Cabinet, including members of the Parliament holding Cabinet positions, are
prohibited from practicing their profession or engaging in any occupation other than the exercise of
their functions as officials of the Bangsamoro Government.
(2) Members of the Parliament who are not holding Cabinet positions may practice their
professions, engage in any occupation, or teach in schools except during session hours: Provided,
That members of the Parliament who are also members of the Philippine Bar shall not:
a. Appear as counsel before any court in any civil case wherein the Bangsamoro
Government or any office, agency, or instrumentality of the government is the adverse
party;
b. Appear as counsel in any criminal case wherein an officer or employee of the National
Government or the Bangsamoro Government is accused of an offense committed in
relation to the office;
c. Collect any fee for appearance in administrative proceedings involving the Bangsamoro
Government; and
Page 18

d. Use property and personnel of the government except when the member concerned is
defending the interest of the government.
(3) Doctors of medicine may practice their profession even during official hours of work only
on occasions of emergency: Provided, That the members concerned do not derive monetary
compensation therefrom.
Sec. 13. Forfeiture of Seat. - A Member of Parliament shall forfeit his/her seat under any of
the following circumstances:
a. Voluntary resignation in the form of either a written or oral declaration in the Parliament;
b. Conviction of a grave offense by a regular court or a finding of guilt of a grave offense as
defined by the Rules of the Bangsamoro Parliament for treason, high crimes, heinous
crimes, crimes against morality, or other crimes punishable by more than six (6) years;
c. Permanent physical or mental incapacity, inability to discharge the duties of a member of
the Bangsamoro Parliament, or death;
d. Substitution by the party to which the member belongs with another member of the same
party, the member having been elected under the proportional representation system;
e. Transfer to another party during one’s incumbency as member of the Bangsamoro
Parliament, the member having been elected under the proportional representation
system;
f. Expulsion by the Bangsamoro Parliament for disorderly behavior, with the concurrence
of two-thirds of all its members; and
g. Such other grounds as may be provided in the Bangsamoro Electoral Code.
Sec. 14. Filling of Vacancy. – In case of a vacancy of a proportional representation seat, the
party to which that seat belongs shall fill the vacancy.
In case of a vacancy of a district seat by an affiliated member of the Bangsamoro Parliament, the
party to which the member belongs shall, within thirty (30) days from the occurrence of such vacancy,
nominate a substitute who shall be appointed by the Chief Minister subject to the Bangsamoro
Electoral Code.
In case of a vacancy in the seat occupied by an unaffiliated member of the Bangsamoro
Parliament occurring at least one (1) year before the expiration of the term of office, a special
election may be called to fill such vacancy in the manner prescribed by law enacted by the
Bangsamoro Parliament.
The appointed or elected member of the Bangsamoro Parliament, as the case may be, shall
serve the unexpired term of the vacant office.
Sec. 15. Privileges and Immunities. - Any member of the Bangsamoro Parliament who commits
an offense within the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region that is punishable by not more than six (6) years
imprisonment, shall be privileged from arrest while the Bangsamoro Parliament is in session.
No member of the Bangsamoro Parliament shall be questioned or be held liable in any other
place for any speech or debate in the Bangsamoro Parliament or in any of its committees.
Sec. 16. Right to Initiate Legislation. - All members of Parliament shall have the right to
initiate legislation. In the order of business, priority legislative agenda shall be determined by the
Government of the Day at the start of every legislative calendar.
Page 19

(a) A Government Bill refers to a legislative initiative that the Government of the Day
submits to Parliament to be approved, and possibly amended, before becoming a law.
(b) A Private Member’s Initiative refers to a legislative initiative introduced by a member of
Parliament who is not a Minister to be approved, and possibly amended, before
becoming a law.
(c) District-Specific Bills may be introduced by the members of the Parliament elected from
single parliamentary districts referred to in Section 7, Article VII of the Bangsamoro
Organic Law.
(d) The Parliament shall regulate popular initiative as regards the submission of bills which
are to be considered by it, in accordance with whatever is established by the
Parliamentary Rules and Procedures.
Draft Government Bills and all associated material are confidential to the Government.
Details of bills are not to be released outside government before their introduction to the Parliament
unless disclosure is authorized by the Cabinet or the Chief Minister.
Members of Parliament may, both in plenary session and in committee, table requests,
questions, interpellations and motions for which presence of the Chief Minister and the Cabinet may
be summoned.
Sec. 17. Appropriations. - No public money including the block grant and other national
government subsidies and support funds given in lump sum shall be spent without an appropriations
act clearly defining the purpose for which it is intended. The Bangsamoro Parliament shall pass an
annual appropriations law.
Sec. 18. Budget. - The form, content, and manner of preparation of the Bangsamoro
Government budget shall be prescribed by law enacted by the Bangsamoro Parliament, consistent
with existing laws, rules and regulations, and submitted by the Bangsamoro Budget Office under the
Ministry of Finance and Budget and Management.
Sec. 19. Reenacted Budget. - If, by the end of a fiscal year, the Bangsamoro Parliament shall have
failed to pass the Bangsamoro appropriations bill for the ensuing fiscal year, the Bangsamoro
appropriations law for the preceding fiscal year shall be deemed reenacted and shall remain in force and
effect until a new Bangsamoro appropriations bill is passed by the Bangsamoro Parliament.
Only the annual appropriations for salaries and wages of existing positions, statutory and
contractual obligations, and operating expenses authorized in the annual budget of the preceding year
shall be deemed reenacted and the disbursement of funds shall be in accordance therewith.
TITLE IV:
The Bangsamoro Cabinet
Chapter 1
Executive Officers
Sec. 1. Head of the Bangsamoro Cabinet. - The Chief Minister heads the Bangsamoro Cabinet,
which consists of the ministers of the fifteen (15) primary ministries, and heads of offices or
agencies, who by law, are determined to be members of the cabinet.
Page 20

Sec. 2. Qualifications of the Chief Minister. - No person shall be elected as Chief Minister
unless a member of the Parliament, a natural-born citizen of the Philippines, and at least twenty-five
(25) years of age on the day of the election.
Sec. 3. Election of the Chief Minister. - On the first day of session following the election of
the members of the Parliament, the Parliament shall elect the Chief Minister by a majority vote of all
its members.
If no member of the Parliament obtains the majority vote necessary to be elected Chief
Minister in the first round of voting, a runoff election shall be conducted: Provided, That the
members of the Parliament shall elect the Chief Minister from the two (2) candidates who obtained
the highest number of votes cast in the first round.
Sec. 4. Powers, Duties, and Functions of the Chief Minister. - The Chief Minister shall
exercise the following powers, duties, and functions:
(a.)
(b.)
(c.)
(d.)
(e.)
(f.)
(g.)
(h.)
(i.)

Head the Bangsamoro Government;
Appoint heads of ministries, agencies, bureaus, and offices of the Bangsamoro
Government or other officers of Bangsamoro-owned or controlled corporations or entities
with original charters;
Appoint other officers in the Bangsamoro Government, as may be provided by the
Parliament;
Formulate a platform of government subject to the approval of the Parliament;
Issue executive orders and other policies of the Bangsamoro Government;
Represent the Bangsamoro Government in the affairs of the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region;
Proclaim a state of calamity whenever typhoons, flash floods, earthquakes, tsunamis, or
other natural or man-made calamities that cause widespread damage or destruction to life
or property in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region; and
Exercise powers as provided in this Code and other laws; and
Exercise such other powers and functions inherent to the office.

Sec. 5. Administration of the Oath of Office. - The oath of office and swearing of the Chief
Minister and all the members of the Parliament upon their election shall be administered by the Wali.
Sec. 6. Membership in Other Bodies. - The Chief Minister shall be a member of the
Mindanao Development Authority Board. The Chief Minister shall be an ex officio member of the
National Security Council, the National Economic and Development Authority Board on matters
concerning the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region, and other bodies as may be provided by law or
other issuances.
Sec. 7. Vacancy in the Office of the Chief Minister. - In case of death, permanent disability,
removal from office, or resignation of the Chief Minister, the Deputy Chief Minister, more senior in
age, shall assume the Chief Minister who shall serve in acting capacity pending the election of a new
Chief Minister by the Bangsamoro Parliament. The election shall be held within thirty (30) days
from the occurrence of the vacancy.
In case of simultaneous permanent vacancies for the positions of the Chief Minister and the
Deputy Chief Ministers, the Speaker of the Bangsamoro Parliament shall ipso facto becomes the
officer-in-charge of the Office of the Chief Minister as its caretaker for its day to day operations and
Page 21

the ministers appointed by said Chief Minister shall continue to perform their duties until their
successors assume office. The Deputy Speaker shall automatically act as the Speaker of the
Parliament. Upon the assumption of the new Chief Minister and the new Deputy Chief Ministers, the
Speaker and the Deputy Speaker shall return to their respective positions.
In case of temporary incapacity of the Chief Minister to perform his/her duties on account of
physical, or when s/he is on official leave of absence or on travel outside the territorial jurisdiction of
the Republic of the Philippines, the Chief Minister may designate an Acting Chief Minister from
among the Ministers who are also members of the Parliament.
Sec. 8. The Deputy Chief Ministers. - There shall be two (2) Deputy Chief Ministers who
shall be nominated by the Chief Minister and elected by members of the Bangsamoro Parliament.
The Bangsamoro Autonomous Region shall have three (3) subregions, namely: South
Western Mindanao, North Central Mindanao, and South Central Mindanao, all within the
Bangsamoro territorial jurisdiction. To ensure representation of all the subregions, the two (2)
Deputy Chief Ministers shall come from the other two (2) sub-regions different from that of the
Chief Minister.
The Deputy Chief Ministers shall provide advisory or consultative services to the Chief
Minister on matters concerning their respective subregion.
The Deputy Chief Ministers may each hold a cabinet position.
Sec. 9. Dissolution of Parliament Upon a Vote of No Confidence. - Within seventy-two (72)
hours upon a vote of no confidence of at least two-thirds (2/3) of all the members of the Parliament
against the Government of the Day, the Chief Minister shall advise the Wali to dissolve the
Parliament and call for a new parliamentary election. The election for a new parliament shall be held
not later than one hundred twenty (120) days from the date of dissolution.
The incumbent Chief Minister and the Cabinet shall continue to conduct the affairs of the
Bangsamoro Government until a new Parliament is convened and a new Chief Minister is elected
and qualified.
In no case shall the Wali countermand the advice of the Chief Minister.
This provision shall not be applicable during the Transition Period, with the members of the
Parliament and the Chief Minister all appointed by the President.
Sec. 10. Prohibitions During Holdover. - After a vote of no confidence against the
government of the day shall have been obtained, and before a new government is formed, the Chief
Minister and the Cabinet shall not contract loans, approve new contracts, or disburse public funds
except those for payment of salaries and wages and expenses for the regular operations of the
government.
The Chief Minister and the Cabinet, during the holdover period, shall not make appointments,
except temporary appointments to positions when continued vacancies therein will prejudice public
service or endanger public safety.
Page 22

Chapter 2
Administrative Organization
Sec. 11. Organization of the Bureaucracy. - The Bangsamoro Government shall have the
power to create offices and organize its own bureaucracy. It may establish other offices and
institutions necessary for the exercise of its functions and delivery of social services in the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.
In the exercise of executive authority, the Chief Minister shall have continuing authority to
reorganize executive offices, as provided under Sec. 74, Chapter 4, Title I, Book IV of this Code.
Sec. 12. Ministers. - Consistent with Section 1, Chapter 1 of this Title, the Chief Minister
shall organize the Bangsamoro Cabinet, majority of whom shall come from the Parliament. The
Chief Minister shall also appoint such other ministers and/or officers as may be necessary to perform
the functions of government.
Sec. 13. The Bangsamoro Cabinet. - Without prejudice to the authority of the Bangsamoro
Government to reorganize the Cabinet and create new offices, the Bangsamoro Cabinet shall be
composed of the following primary ministries with sub-offices, namely:
a. Finance, and Budget and Management;
b. Social Services and Development;
c. Trade, Investments, and Tourism;
d. Labor and Employment;
e. Transportation and Communications;
f. Basic, Higher, and Technical Education;
g. Indigenous Peoples’ Affairs;
h. Health;
i. Public Works;
j. Interior and Local Government;
k. Environment, Natural Resources, and Energy;
l. Human Settlements and Development;
m. Science and Technology;
n. Agriculture, Fisheries, and Agrarian Reform; and
o. Public Order and Safety.
Sec. 14. Deputy Ministers. - The Chief Minister shall appoint Deputy Ministers in the
ministries above-enumerated.
Sec. 15. Term of Office of Ministers and their Deputies. - The term of office of Ministers
and their deputies shall be coterminous with the Chief Minister, unless sooner removed by the latter.
Sec. 16. Other Cases When a Minister Ceases to Hold Office. - A Minister shall also cease
to hold office as Minister:
a. If s/he files a certificate of candidacy for any elective position. Nominees under the party
system in the Parliament are not covered by this provision;
b. If s/he resigns as Minister; and
c. If s/he is elected as Speaker, Deputy Speaker, Majority Floor Leader, or Minority Floor
Leader of the Bangsamoro Parliament.
Page 23

Sec. 17. Ministers to Remain Members of Parliament. - Members of Parliament who are
appointed Ministers shall retain their membership in the Parliament.
Sec. 18. Prohibition from Double Compensation. - Consistent with the last paragraph of
Section 13, Article VII of the Bangsamoro Organic Law, Ministers who are at the same time
Members of the Parliament shall receive only such salaries and emoluments as Members of the
Parliament. Nothing herein shall, however, proscribe ministers from receiving allowable honoraria
and other allowances for services rendered as such, subject to the usual accounting and auditing rules
and regulations of the government.
TITLE V:
The Bangsamoro Justice System
Sec. 1. Justice System in the Bangsamoro. - The Bangsamoro justice system shall be
administered in accordance with the unique cultural and historical heritage of the Bangsamoro.
The dispensation of justice in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region shall be in consonance
with the Constitution, Shari'ah, traditional or tribal laws, and other relevant laws.
Shari'ah or Islamic law forms part of the Islamic tradition derived from religious precepts of
Islam, particularly the Qur'an and Sunnah.
Shari'ah shall apply exclusively to cases involving Muslims. Where a case involves a
non-Muslim, Shari'ah law may apply only if the non-Muslim voluntarily submits to the jurisdiction
of the Shari'ah court.
The traditional or tribal laws shall be applicable to disputes of indigenous peoples within the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.
The provisions of this Article shall not prejudice the rights of non-Muslims and
non-indigenous peoples.
A. SHARI’AH COURTS
Sec. 2. Shari'ah Courts. - Shari'ah courts within the Bangsamoro territorial jurisdiction shall
form part of the Philippine judicial system subject to the supervision of the Supreme Court. The
regular courts within the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region shall continue to function under the
supervision of the Supreme Court.
Sec. 3. Power of the Parliament to Enact Laws Pertaining to Shari'ah. - The Parliament
shall have the power to enact laws on personal, family, and property law jurisdiction.
For this purpose, the Parliament shall enact laws governing commercial and other civil
actions not provided for under Presidential Decree No. 1083, as amended, otherwise known as "Code
of Muslim Personal Laws of the Philippines," and criminal jurisdiction on minor offenses punishable
by arresto menor or ta'zir which must be equivalent to arresto menor or fines commensurate to the
offense.
Sec. 4. Jurisdiction of the Shari'ah Circuit Courts. - The Shari'ah Circuit Courts in the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region shall exercise exclusive original jurisdiction over the following
Page 24

cases where either or both parties are Muslims: Provided, That the non-Muslim party voluntarily
submits to its jurisdiction:
a. All cases involving offenses defined and punishable under Presidential Decree No. 1083,
where the act or omission has been committed in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region;
b. All civil actions and proceedings between parties residing in the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region who are Muslims or have been married in accordance with Article
13 of Presidential Decree No. 1083, involving disputes relating to:
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
v.
vi.
vii.

Marriage;
Divorce;
Betrothal or breach of contract to marry;
Customary dower or mahr;
Disposition and distribution of property upon divorce;
Maintenance and support, and consolatory gifts; and
Restitution of marital rights;

c. All case involving disputes relative to communal properties;
d. All cases involving ta'zir offenses defined and punishable under Shari'ah law enacted by
the Parliament punishable by arresto menor or corresponding fine, or both;
e. All civil actions under Shari'ah law enacted by the Parliament involving real property in
the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region where the assessed value of the property does not
exceed Four Hundred Thousand Pesos (₱400,000.00); and
f. All civil actions, if they have not specified in an agreement which law shall govern their
relations, where the demand or claim does not exceed Two Hundred Thousand Pesos
(₱200,000.00).
Sec. 5. Jurisdiction of the Shari'ah District Courts. - The Shari'ah District Courts in the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region shall exercise exclusive original jurisdiction over the following
cases where either or both are Muslims: Provided, That the non-Muslim party voluntarily submits to
its jurisdiction:
a. All cases involving custody, guardianship, legitimacy, and paternity and filiation arising
under Presidential Decree No. 1083;
b. All cases involving disposition, distribution, and settlement of the estate of deceased
Muslims, probate of wills issuance of letters of administrators or executors regardless of
the nature or the aggregate value of the property;
c. Petitions for the declaration of absence and death, and for the cancellation or correction
of entries in the Muslim Registries mentioned in Title VI of Book Two of Presidential
Decree No. 1083;
d. All actions arising from customary and Shari'ah compliant contracts in which the parties
are Muslims, if they failed to specify the law governing their relations;
e. All petitions for mandamus, prohibition, injunction, certiorari, habeas corpus, and all
other auxiliary writs and processes, in aid of its appellate jurisdiction;
f. Petition for the constitution of a family home, change of name, and commitment of an
insane person to an asylum;
g. All other personal and real actions not falling under the jurisdiction of the Shari'ah
Circuit Courts wherein the parties involved are Muslims, except those for forcible entry
and unlawful detainer, which shall fall under the exclusive original jurisdiction of the
Municipal Trial Court;
Page 25

h. All special civil actions for interpleader or declaratory relief wherein the parties are
Muslims residing in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region or the property involved
belongs exclusively to Muslim and is located in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region;
i. All civil actions under Shari'ah law enacted by the Parliament involving real property in
the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region where the assessed value of the property exceeds
Four Hundred Thousand Pesos (₱400,000.00); and
j. All civil actions, if they have not specified in the agreement which law shall govern their
relations where the demand or claim exceeds Two Hundred Thousand Pesos
(₱200,000.00).
The Shari'ah District Court in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region shall exercise appellate
jurisdiction over all cases decided upon the Shari'ah Circuit Courts in the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region within its territorial jurisdiction as provided under Article 144 of Presidential Decree No.
1083, as amended.
Sec. 6. Shari'ah High Court. - There is hereby created within the Bangsamoro territorial
jurisdiction, as part of the Philippine judicial system, a Shari'ah High Court. It shall exercise
exclusive original jurisdiction over the following cases where either or both parties are
Muslims: Provided, That the non-Muslim party voluntarily submits to its jurisdiction:
a. All petitions for mandamus, prohibition, injunction, certiorari, habeas corpus, and all
other auxiliary writs and processes, in aid of its appellate jurisdiction; and
b. All actions for annulment of judgments of Shari'ah District Courts within outside the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region.
The decisions of the Shari'ah High Court shall be final and executory except on questions of
law which may be raised before the Supreme Court following the procedure for appeals from the
Court of Appeals to the Supreme Court.
Nothing contained herein shall affect the original and appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme
Court as provided in the Constitution.
Sec. 7. Composition and Organization of the Shari'ah High Court. - The Shari'ah High Court
shall be composed of five (5) Justices, including the Presiding Justice.
The Parliament may recommend to the Supreme Court the complete organization of the
Shari’ah High Court in Cotabato City, where the seat of the Bangsamoro Government is located.
Sec. 8. Shari'ah High Court Administrator and Clerk of Court. - The Supreme Court shall,
upon recommendation of the Presiding Justice of the Shari'ah High Court, appoint the court
administrator and clerk of court of the High Court. Such other personnel as may be necessary for the
Shari'ah High Court shall be appointed by the Presiding Justice of said court.
The pertinent provisions of existing law regarding the qualifications, appointments,
compensations, functions, duties, and other matters relative to the personnel of the Court of Appeals
shall apply to those of the Shari'ah High Court.
Sec. 9. Compensation, Benefits, Tenure, and Privileges. - Justices of the Shari'ah High Court
shall have the same rank, prerogatives, salaries, allowances, benefits, tenure, and privileges as the
Justices of the Court of Appeals.
Page 26

Judges of the Shari'ah District Courts shall have the same rank, prerogatives, salaries,
allowances, benefits, tenure, and privileges as judges of the Regional Trial Court.
Judges of the Shari'ah Circuit Courts shall have the same rank, prerogatives, salaries,
allowances, benefits, tenure, and privileges as judges of the Municipal Trial Court.
Pending the complete organization of the Shari'ah High Court, the decisions of
the Shari'ah Courts shall be appealable to the Court of Appeals.
Sec. 10. Qualifications of Shari'ah Judges. a. Shari'ah Circuit Court - No person shall be appointed judge of the Shari'ah Circuit Court
unless a citizen of the Philippines who is a Muslim, a regular member of the Philippine Bar,
at least thirty (30) years of age, must have been engaged in the practice of law for five (5)
years or more, and has completed at least two (2) years of Shari'ah or Islamic
Jurisprudence.
b. Shari'ah District Court - No person shall be appointed judge of the Shari'ah District Court
unless a citizen of the Philippines who is a Muslim, a regular member of the Philippine Bar,
at least thirty-five (35) years of age, must have been engaged in the practice of law for ten
(10) years or more, and has completed at least two (2) years of Shari'ah or Islamic
Jurisprudence.
c. Shari'ah High Court - No person shall be appointed as justice of the Shari'ah High Court
unless a natural-born citizen of the Philippines who is a Muslim, a regular member of the
Philippine Bar, at least forty (40) years of age, must have been engaged in the practice of
law for fifteen (15) years or more, and has completed at least two years of Shari'ah or
Islamic Jurisprudence.
A Shari'ah Justice or Judge must be a person of competence, integrity, probity, and
independence.
The Supreme Court may grant the incumbent Shari'ah District and Circuit Court judges who
are not regular members of the Philippine Bar a reasonable period within which to qualify, pending
which they shall allowed to continue discharging their duties.
Sec. 11. Practice of Law Before Shari'ah Courts. - The following are eligible to practice
before Shari'ah courts:
a. A Shari'ah counselor-at-law; and
b. A regular member of the Philippine Bar: Provided, that a Muslim, or non-Muslim who
submits to the jurisdiction of the Shari'ah court, who acts on one's behalf as counsel, shall
be allowed to appear as such before any Shari'ah court.
Sec. 12. Appointment and Discipline of Shari'ah Court Personnel. - The Supreme Court shall
appoint the Shari'ah court personnel and shall have the power to discipline them.

Page 27

B. SHARI’AH PUBLIC ASSISTANCE OFFICE
Sec. 13. Composition. - There is hereby created a Shari'ah Public Assistance Office, to be
headed by a director assisted by two (2) counselors who are members of the Philippine Shari'ah Bar.
They shall be assisted by an immediate staff.
The director and two (2) Shari’ah counselors shall be appointed by the Chief Minister.
Unless otherwise provided by regional law, the compensation of the director and the Shari'ah
counselors shall be equivalent to the salary grade of a Director III and a trial lawyer of the Public
Assistance Office, respectively.
The Shari'ah Public Assistance Office is hereby established in each of the Shari'ah judicial
districts to provide free legal assistance to poor or indigent party litigants.
In the absence of an appropriate ministry or office to which the Shari'ah Public Assistance
Office may be attached, it shall, in the interim, be attached to the Office of the Chief Minister.
Sec. 14. Functions. - The Shari’ah Public Assistance Office shall have the following
functions:
a. Provide free legal assistance to indigent party litigants with cases before the Shari’ah
Courts;
b. Prepare and file petitions, complaints and/or responsive pleadings, and represent indigent
defendants in ordinary civil actions before the Shari’ah Courts;
c. Prepare and file responsive pleadings and represent indigent defendants/respondents in
ordinary civil actions, special civil actions, special proceedings before the Shari’ah
Courts,
d. Prepare affidavits and represent indigents in any stage of criminal proceedings before the
Shari’ah Courts; and
e. Perform such other functions as may be assigned by higher authorities.
C. SHARI’AH SPECIAL PROSECUTION SERVICE
Sec. 15. Composition. - There is hereby created a Shari’ah Special Prosecution Service for
Shari’ah administration of justice in the Bangsamoro. The Shari’ah Special Prosecution Service
shall be attached to the National Prosecutorial Service of the National Government. The Bangsamoro
Government shall recommend the qualified applicants for the position of the Shari’ah prosecutors
and personnel of the Shari’ah Special Prosecution Service to the Secretary of Justice of the National
Government.
Sec. 16. Functions. - The Shari’ah Special Prosecution Service shall have the following
functions:
a. Assist in the administration of the Shari’ah justice system in the Bangsamoro;
b. Provide legal assistance and advice to any resident of the Bangsamoro Region seeking to
file a criminal case in the Shari’ah courts;

Page 28

c. Conduct the preliminary investigation and prosecution of criminal cases where both
parties are Muslims and they fall under Shari’ah Criminal Justice System, as provided for
in the Bangsamoro Organic Law;
d. Monitor all criminal cases filed with the Shari’ah Courts, maintain an updated record of
the status of each case, and adopt such systems and procedures as will expedite the
disposition of such cases; and
e. Perform such other functions as may be assigned by higher authorities.
D. OFFICE FOR TRADITIONAL OR TRIBAL JUSTICE SYSTEMS
Sec. 17. Traditional or Tribal Justice Systems. - The indigenous peoples shall have the right
to use their commonly accepted justice systems, conflict resolution institutions, peace building
processes or mechanisms, and order customary laws and practices within their respective
communities and as may be compatible with the national legal system and with internationally
recognized human rights.
The traditional justice systems are the mechanisms to determine, settle, and decide
controversies and enforce decisions involving disputes between members of the indigenous peoples
concerned in accordance with the customary laws of these communities.
Sec. 18. Office for Traditional or Tribal Justice Systems. – The Office for Traditional or
Tribal Justice Systems is hereby created, with the primary responsibility of overseeing the study,
preservation, and development of traditional or tribal justice systems within the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Region. It shall be attached to the Office of the Chief Minister.
The Office for Traditional or Tribal Justice Systems shall ensure the full participation of Moro
or non-Moro indigenous peoples in the formulation, implementation, and evaluation of policies,
related to the strengthening of tribal justice systems: Provided, That such system shall maintain their
indigenous character in accordance with the respective practices of each tribe.
Sec. 19. Composition. - The Office for Traditional or Tribal Justice Systems shall be headed
by a Director II and assisted by support staff, all of whom shall be appointed by the Chief Minister.
Appointees shall preferably be members of tribal communities.
Sec. 20. Functions. - The Office for Traditional or Tribal Justice Systems shall have the
following functions:
a. Conduct the study and preservation of traditional or tribal justice systems within the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region;
b. Promote the development, formulation, implementation, and evaluation of policies,
related to the strengthening of tribal justice systems;
c. Coordinate with ministries, offices and agencies within the Bangsamoro Autonomous
Region to ensure meaningful and timely consultation with tribal leaders in relation to
item (b); and
d. Perform such other functions as may be assigned by the Chief Minister and higher
authorities.

Page 29

E. REGULAR COURTS
Sec. 21. Regular Courts. - Regular courts in the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region shall
continue to exercise their judicial functions, as provided by law.
Sec. 22. Alternative Dispute Resolution. - The Bangsamoro Government adopts the principles
of conciliation and mediation in settling disputes, with the Parliament enacting the necessary
legislation to institute the mechanism for alternative dispute resolution. The Shari'ah courts and
traditional or tribal adjudicatory tribunals may utilize this mode of settlement and resolution of cases.
BOOK IV
THE OFFICE OF THE CHIEF MINISTER
TITLE I:
Powers of the Chief Minister
Chapter 1
Power of Control
Sec. 1. Power of Control. – As Head of the Bangsamoro Government, the Chief Minister
shall have control and supervision of all ministries, agencies, offices, bureaus, commissions, boards
and instrumentalities of the Bangsamoro Government. The Chief Minister shall ensure that laws are
faithfully executed.
Chapter 2
Rule Making Power
Sec. 2. Executive Orders. - Acts of the Chief Minister providing for rules of a general or
permanent character in implementation or execution of powers vested by the Constitution and the
Bangsamoro Organic Law or by law shall be promulgated in executive orders.
Sec. 3. Administrative Orders. - Acts of the Chief Minister which relate to particular aspects
of governmental operations in pursuance of his/her duties as head of the Bangsamoro Government
shall be promulgated in administrative orders.
Sec. 4. Proclamations. - Acts of the Chief Minister fixing a date or declaring a status or
condition of public moment or interest, upon the existence of which the operation of a specific law or
regulation is made to depend, shall be promulgated in proclamations which shall have the force of an
executive order.
Sec. 5. Memorandum Orders. - Acts of the Chief Minister on matters of administrative
details or of subordinate or temporary interest which only concern a particular officer or office of the
Bangsamoro Government shall be embodied in memorandum orders.
Sec. 6. Memorandum Circulars. - Acts of the Chief Minister on matters relating to internal
administration, which the Chief Minister desires to bring to the attention of all or some of the
ministries, agencies, offices, bureaus, commissions, boards and instrumentalities of the Bangsamoro
Government, for information or compliance, shall be embodied in memorandum circulars.
Page 30

Chapter 3
Power of Appointment and Designation
Sec. 7. Power of Appointment. – The Chief Minister shall be the appointing authority of
heads of ministries, offices, commissions, boards, agencies, bureaus, and offices of the Bangsamoro
Government or, other offices of the Bangsamoro-owned or controlled corporations, or entities with
original charters.
The Chief Minister shall likewise be the appointing authority of the deputy ministers,
directors, or their equivalents, and all positions with a Salary Grade of 25 and above, unless
otherwise expressly provided for by law.
The Speaker of the Parliament shall exercise administrative supervision over the legislative
personnel, staff, and secretariat of the Bangsamoro Parliament, and shall be the appointing authority
to all career positions in the Parliament including coterminous and contractual positions, as well as
contracts of service thereat. Provided, That the Speaker shall consult with the Chief Minister on the
appointment of those applying for positions with Salary Grade 25 and above: Provided, however,
That the appointment of personnel under the office of the individual Members of Parliament shall be
made only upon recommendation of the Member concerned who shall exercise direct supervision
and control over such personnel.
The Heads of Offices shall appoint officials and employees to positions with Salary Grade of
24 and below in their respective agencies or offices.
Any person who fails to assume the office to which s/he is appointed within thirty (30) days
from the date s/he received notice of the appointment shall forfeit the right to assume the position,
subject to civil service laws and rules, except if the non-assumption is due to temporary illness or
physical disabilities acquired after the said appointment was issued.
Sec. 8. Power to Issue Designation. - (1) The Chief Minister may designate an officer
already in the government service to perform the functions of an office, in concurrent capacity in
appropriate cases, when: (a) the officer regularly appointed to the office is unable to perform his/her
duties due to lawful cause/s or by reason of serious illness, or unauthorized absence of at least
fourteen (14) days; or (b) there exists a vacancy. Provided, That a designation shall not exceed one
(1) year and subject to the limitations as provided by law.
This provision shall not apply to Members of Parliament, who can only be appointed as
Ministers or Deputy Ministers, or their equivalent.
Chapter 4
Power to Contract Loans
Sec. 9. Power to Contract Domestic or Foreign Loans. - The Parliament, by a vote of the
majority of all its members, may authorize the Chief Minister to contract domestic or foreign loans,
credits, and other forms of indebtedness to finance the construction, installation, improvement,
expansion, operation or maintenance of public utilities, infrastructure facilities, housing projects,
acquisition or real property, implementation of other capital investment projects, and for the
development and welfare of the people of the Bangsamoro.
Page 31

Subject to acceptable credit worthiness, and in compliance with the Constitution, relevant
laws and regulations, such loans may be secured from domestic loans requiring sovereign guaranty,
whether explicit or implicit, which would require the approval of the National Government.
The National Government shall assist the Bangsamoro Government in complying with the
requirements for a speedy issuance of the sovereign guaranty to finance local infrastructure and other
socioeconomic development projects in accordance with the Bangsamoro Development Plan. Within
thirty (30) days from the submission by the Bangsamoro Government of its application for sovereign
guaranty, the National Government shall inform the Bangsamoro Government of the actions taken
on the application.
Chapter 5
Power of Eminent Domain
Sec. 10. Power of Eminent Domain. - The Chief Minister shall determine when it is
necessary or advantageous to exercise the power of eminent domain in behalf of the Bangsamoro
Government, and direct the Bangsamoro Attorney General, whenever such action is deemed
appropriate, to institute expropriation proceedings in the proper court.
TITLE II:
Organization
A. OFFICE OF THE CHIEF MINISTER
Sec. 1. Organization. - The Office of the Chief Minister shall consist of the Office of the
Chief Minister Proper and his/her immediate staff, and the offices and agencies under it.
Sec. 2. Office of the Chief Minister Proper. - The Office of the Chief Minister Proper shall
consist of:
1. The Chief Minister;
2. The Two (2) Deputy Chief Ministers;
3. The Executive Offices, which shall include the Office of the Senior Minister, the Office
of the Chief of Staff, the Office of the Cabinet Secretary, the Bangsamoro Attorney
General’s Office, and all offices, agencies, boards, commissions, and councils attached to
it; and
4. The Bangsamoro Management and Support System (BMSS) embraces the following: The
Technical Management Service (TMS), Administrative Management Service (AMS),
Finance Management Service (FMS), Intelligence and Security Service (ISS), the
Procurement Service (PS), the Clinic, the Bangsamoro Satellite Coordinating Offices, the
Bangsamoro Liaison Office in Metro Manila, and the Bangsamoro Library and Archives.
B. THE EXECUTIVE OFFICES
Sec. 3. Declaration of Policy. - The Executive Offices shall provide services to deliver
specific needs and requirements of the Office of the Chief Minister to achieve the purposes and
objectives by which it was established.
Page 32

Sec. 4. The Office of the Senior Minister. - The Office of the Senior Minister shall consist of
the Senior Minister, who shall be assisted by one (1) Assistant Senior Minister and support staff.
Sec. 5. Powers and Functions of the Senior Minister. - The Senior Minister, subject to the
control and supervision of the Chief Minister, shall carry out the functions assigned by law to the
Executive Office and shall perform such other duties as may be delegated to him/her. S/he shall:
a. Assist the Chief Minister in the management of the affairs of the Bangsamoro
Autonomous Government;
b. Execute the directives of the Chief Minister;
c. Act on issues and concerns raised by the ministries and offices and such other public and
private institutions;
d. Exercise primary authority to sign official documents “By Authority of the Chief
Minister”, or “For the Chief Minister”, whichever is deemed appropriate, to attest to
executive orders and other Chief Minister’s issuances unless attestation is specifically
delegated to other officials by him or by the Chief Minister;
e. Recommend to the Chief Minister appropriate assignment of offices and agencies not
assigned by law under any specific ministry;
f. Provide consultative, research, fact-finding, and advisory services to the Chief Minister;
g. Assist the Chief Minister in the administration of special projects;
h. Perform acts that are necessary to carry out the objectives, policies, and functions of the
Office of the Chief Minister Proper; and
i. Perform such other functions as the Chief Minister may direct.
Sec. 6. The Office of the Chief of Staff. - The Office of the Chief of Staff shall be composed
of the Chief of Staff, who shall be assisted by support staff.
Sec. 7. Powers and Functions of the Chief of Staff. – The Chief of Staff shall:
a. Manage and supervise Protocols, Appointments and Special Concerns of the Office of the
Chief Minister;
b. Assist the Chief Minister in the administration of the internal affairs of the Office of the
Chief Minister;
c. Refer issues, concerns or other actionable matters for appropriate action to the proper
offices within the Office of the Chief Minister;
d. Recommend executive action on matters affecting the Office of the Chief Minister; and
e. Perform other tasks as may be directed by the Chief Minister.
Sec. 8. The Cabinet Secretariat. - The Cabinet Secretariat shall consist of the Cabinet
Secretary, assisted by an Assistant Cabinet Secretary and support staff.
Sec. 9. Duties and Functions of the Cabinet Secretary. - The Cabinet Secretary shall:
a. Provide secretariat support and technical assistance to the Cabinet, the Cabinet Clusters,
and other committees that may be created by the Cabinet;
b. Assist the Chief Minister in the formulation and/or generation of agenda topics for
cabinet deliberation or facilitate/moderate the discussion of cabinet meetings;
c. Facilitate the formulation of Cabinet Bills and the legislative agenda of the Cabinet;
d. Coordinate the schedules of cabinet meetings and other multi-ministry meetings;
Page 33

e. Monitor the progress and status on the implementation of the Chief Minister’s directives,
issuances, and instructions by concerned ministries and agencies/offices agreed during
the cabinet meetings and other multi-ministry meetings;
f. Submit updates to the Chief Minister on the status of the implementation of all directives,
issuances, and instructions;
g. Supervise special programs that may be assigned by the Chief Minister; and
h. Perform such other functions as may be directed by the Chief Minister.
Sec. 10. The Bangsamoro Attorney General’s Office (BAGO). - The Bangsamoro Attorney
General’s Office shall consist of the Bangsamoro Attorney General, assisted by a Bangsamoro
Assistant Attorney General, divisions and support staff as provided for under Bangsamoro
Autonomy Act No. 5.
Sec. 11. Appointment of Attorney-General and Assistant Attorney-General. - The Chief
Minister shall appoint the Bangsamoro Attorney-General and the Bangsamoro Assistant
Attorney-General. In line with the primarily confidential nature of the positions, the appointments of
the Bangsamoro Attorney-General and Bangsamoro Assistant Attorney-General shall be coterminous
with the appointing authority.
The appointment of all officials and employees in the Bangsamoro Attorney General’s Office
shall be in accordance with Section 7, Chapter 3, Title I, Book IV above.
Sec. 12. Qualifications. - No person shall be appointed Bangsamoro Attorney-General unless
s/he is a citizen of the Philippines, a member of the Philippine Bar in good standing, of recognized
competence, a bona fide resident of the Bangsamoro Autonomous Region, and has been engaged in the
practice of law for at least ten (10) years.
Sec. 13. Functions of the Bangsamoro Attorney-General. - The Bangsamoro
Attorney-General shall:

a.

b.
c.
d.
e.

Be the chief legal counsel of the Bangsamoro Government. As such, s/he shall render
legal opinions in all legal matters brought to him/her, to the Parliament, the Chief
Minister, and other Ministries of the BARMM, and provide legal advice to any official
or agent of the BARMM, either motu proprio or when called upon to render such advice;
Review, vet, and interpret local, national, and international documents, contracts, and
agreements for and on behalf of the Chief Minister;
Recommend appropriate actions on administrative complaints lodged before the Office
of the Chief Minister;
May be called upon by the BARMM Intergovernmental Relations officials to assist the
Intergovernmental Relations Body when necessary; and
Perform such other functions as may be provided by law and/or assigned by the Chief
Minister.

Sec. 14. Powers of the Bangsamoro Attorney-General. -

(1) The Bangsamoro Attorney-General, in discharging his/her functions, shall have the power to:
a.

Require any officer or employee in the Bangsamoro Government to furnish any
information in relation to the performance of his/her duties and functions;
Page 34

b.

c.

Summon any officer or employee in the Bangsamoro Government, except Members of
Parliament, and their immediate staff, to explain and/or provide assistance including
case build-up relative to any matter which is, or could be, the subject of litigation by or
against the Bangsamoro Government; and
Administer oaths in relation to the performance of his/her functions.

(2) The Bangsamoro Attorney-General shall, in exercise of executive functions:
a.
b.
c.

Subject to the approval of the Cabinet, propose to the Parliament the establishment,
merger and/or abolition of such divisions, sections or units in the Office as may be
necessary for the efficient delivery of legal service;
Supervise the formulation of policies and plans of the Office; and
Perform any other action necessary in the administrative interests of the Office.

(3) The Bangsamoro Attorney-General shall, upon request, appear and advise on any legal matter
in any committee of the Bangsamoro Parliament.
Sec. 15. Bangsamoro Assistant Attorney-General; Powers and functions. Bangsamoro Assistant Attorney-General shall:

The

(1) Advise and assist the Bangsamoro Attorney-General in formulating and implementing
policies and programs and in providing overall supervision and direction to divisions of
the Office; and
(2) Perform such other functions as may be assigned to him/her by the Bangsamoro
Attorney-General.
Sec. 16. Salary and Compensation. - The Bangsamoro Attorney-General shall have the rank
of a cabinet member with a Salary Grade of 28, while the Bangsamoro Assistant Attorney- General
shall have a Salary Grade of 27.
The Bangsamoro Attorney-General and Bangsamoro Assistant Attorney-General shall be
entitled to benefits and other emoluments as may be prescribed by the civil service law, and other
applicable rules and regulations.
Sec. 17. Divisions in the Bangsamoro Attorney-General’s Office. -

(1)

The Office consists of the following Divisions:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

Litigation Division (LD);
Legal Research and Opinion Division (LROD);
Intergovernmental Relations Division (IRD); and
Administrative and Finance Division (AFD).

The following divisions shall perform their mandated functions herein enumerated
under the control and supervision of the Bangsamoro Attorney-General.

(2)

The Litigation Division shall provide services related to the function of the
Bangsamoro Attorney-General as the legal counsel of the Bangsamoro Government,
as hereunder provided:
(a)

Represent the Bangsamoro Government in all its civil and administrative
Page 35

(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)

(g)

(3)

proceedings, as well as in criminal proceedings where the Bangsamoro
Government is the plaintiff,
Appear before any court in actions involving the validity of any law, executive
order, proclamation, or regulations when, in the BAGO’s judgment,
intervention is necessary or when requested or directed by the court;
Initiate court action against any person, corporation, or firm for the enforcement
of a contact with the Bangsamoro Government;
Upon request of the Chief Minister or other proper office of the Bangsamoro
Government, prepare documents for use in official transactions with conformity
to law and public interest in mind;
Deputize government legal officers to assist the BAGO, with the concurrence of
the head of office to which the legal officers belong;
Upon directive of the Chief Minister and in coordination with the Office of
Attorney-General, represent the Bangsamoro in international litigations,
negotiations, or conferences where the legal position of the Bangsamoro must
be defended or represented; and
Carry out other functions assigned by the Bangsamoro Attorney-General.

The Legal Research and Opinion Division (LROD) shall assist the Bangsamoro
Attorney-General in providing legal advice to the Chief Minister, the Bangsamoro
Cabinet, and ministries, agencies, offices and instrumentalities of the Bangsamoro
Government as may be established. In particular, the LROD shall carry out the following
functions:
(a)

Review, recommend, draft legal orders, and/or conduct due diligence on the
following matters that are subject to the decision of the Chief Minister, such as:
i.
ii.
iii.

(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

(4)

Executive orders, proclamations, administrative orders, memorandum
orders, and other legal documents initiated or issued by the Chief Minister;
Decisions reversing or modifying the decisions, resolutions or orders of a
head of ministry; and
Other matters that the Chief Minister, may refer to the Bangsamoro
Attorney-General.

Provide legal assistance to the Chief Minister on the Parliamentary agenda of the
Bangsamoro Government;
Draft and/review contracts and legal documents for approval of the Chief Minister
and the various Ministers;
Formulate and review policies on Shari’ah matters to ensure compliance with
Shari’ah rules and principles, and provide written Shari’ah opinions to the Chief
Minister and the Cabinet; and
Exercise functions as may be delegated by the Bangsamoro Attorney-General.

The Administrative and Finance Division shall be established to carry out the following
functions:
a. Provide administrative support to the Office;
b. Manage the finances of the Office; and
c. Carry out other administrative functions assigned by the Bangsamoro AttorneyGeneral.
Page 36

Sec. 18. Legal Liaison Network. - The Legal Officers in the Bangsamoro Attorney- General’s
Office and the legal officers in various Bangsamoro ministries, agencies, offices, or instrumentalities
who carry out legal services or other legal duties, shall form and compose the Legal Liaison Network
(LLN) of the Bangsamoro Government. They shall cooperate and coordinate on legal, policy, and
legislative matters. The Bangsamoro Attorney-General shall be the ex officio Chairperson of theLLN.
Sec. 19. Legal Services. (1) Ministries, agencies, and offices of the Bangsamoro Government that engage the
services of a lawyer in private practice or any other person to carry out a legal service
shall notify the Bangsamoro Attorney-General of such engagement, for records
purposes.
(2) A Ministry, agency or office of the Bangsamoro Government may, in writing, request
the Bangsamoro Attorney-General to provide legal service as may be necessary in the
efficient discharge of public functions.
(3) A legal service requested under the immediately preceding paragraph may be provided
only when no conflict of interest will arise and in case the agency does not have the
legal capacity to carry out the functions.
Sec. 20. Administrative Support. — The Bangsamoro Attorney-General shall manage the
budget allocated to its office. For this purpose, the Bangsamoro Government shall directly transfer
and release to the Bangsamoro Attorney-General’s Office its regular fund allocation.
Sec. 21. Referral of Matters for Opinion of the Bangsamoro Attorney-General. - All
Bangsamoro ministries, agencies, offices, or instrumentalities may seek the opinion of the Bangsamoro
Attorney-General on matters involving constitutional issues.
Legal officers of ministries, agencies, offices, and other instrumentalities of the Bangsamoro
Government may render legal opinions on other matters, copy-furnished the Bangsamoro
Attorney-General’s Office.
Sec. 22. Notice to the Bangsamoro Attorney-General. - All Bangsamoro ministries, agencies,
offices, or instrumentalities shall notify the Bangsamoro Attorney-General of all litigation within three
(3) days upon notice. No case or litigation of any kind shall be filed or commenced in behalf of the
Bangsamoro Government, its ministries, commissions, agencies and other offices without prior notice to the
Bangsamoro Attorney-General.
Sec. 23. Nature of Offices. - The Senior Minister, Assistant Senior Minister, Chief of Staff,
Cabinet Secretary, Assistant Cabinet Secretary, Bangsamoro Attorney General, and Bangsamoro
Assistant Attorney General shall all hold office coterminous with that of the appointing Chief
Minister.
Sec. 24. Protection from Personal Liability. (1)

(2)

No criminal civil or administrative suit shall be brought against the Bangsamoro
Attorney-General, the Bangsamoro Assistant Attorney-General or a subordinate
officer in respect of any proceeding in a court of law or in the course of
discharging of the functions of the Bangsamoro Attorney-General under this Act.
The Bangsamoro Attorney-General, the Bangsamoro Assistant Attorney-General
or a subordinate officer shall, if the exercise of official function is done in good
Page 37

faith, not be personally liable for any action, claim or demand whatsoever.
C. BANGSAMORO MANAGEMENT SUPPORT SYSTEM
Sec. 25. Functions of the Bangsamoro Management Support System (BMSS). – The
various support offices in the Office of the Chief Minister Proper, namely: Technical Management
Service (TMS), Administrative Management Service (AMS), Finance Management Service (FMS),
Intelligence and Security Service (ISS), the Procurement Service (PS), the Clinic, the Bangsamoro
Satellite Coordinating Offices, the Bangsamoro Liaison Office in Metro Manila, and the
Bangsamoro Library and Archives shall constitute the Bangsamoro Management Support System
and shall be organized to carry out the following functions:
(1) Technical Management Service (TMS)a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.
h.

Consolidate and prepare annual accomplishment report of the services including
foreign assisted and national programs and projects lodge at the Office of the Chief
Minister;
Prepare programs and project plans and designs for the Office of the Chief Minister;
Provide research support to the Office of the Chief Minister in the formulation of
regional policies, guidelines, and legislative agenda;
Provide technical support to the BARMM ministries, agencies, offices, and bureaus,
when necessary;
Assist the services within the OCM and offices that are under the direct
control and supervision of the OCM in the preparation of annual budget;
Develop a system that will assess the performance of ministries, offices, and
bureaus under the Office of the Chief Minister;
Regularly apprise the Chief Minister on the status of all plans/programs/projects
implemented by BARMM ministries, agencies, offices, and bureaus; and
Perform other functions, as may be directed by the Chief Minister.

(2) Administrative Management Service (AMS) - The Administrative Management Service
shall be composed of a Director III as head, and support staff. It shall:
a.
b.
c.
d.
e.
f.
g.

Recommend policies and develop guidelines for an efficient and effective
management of personnel, records, supplies, equipment, collections, and property of
the Office of the Chief Minister;
Plan and direct administrative services of all units under its supervision and
coordinate administrative services and concerns with all other ministries or offices;
Recruit and recommend personnel for appointment and implement an effective
system of personnel management;
Consolidate all Strategic Performance Management System (SPMS) ratings of all
employees in the Office of the Chief Minister, attached offices thereto, ministries
and offices thereunder;
Conduct inspections and inventory of all properties and assets of the Office of the
Chief Minister;
Maintain an effective, systematic, and timely disposition of records; and
Perform other functions as maybe directed by Chief Minister and other authorized
officials of the Office of the Chief Minister.

(1) Finance Management Service (FMS) - The Finance Management Service shall be
Page 38

composed of a Director III as head, and support staff. It shall:
a.
b.
c.
d.

e.
f.
g.
h.
i.
j.
(4)

The Intelligence and Security Service (ISS) - The Intelligence and Security Service
shall be composed of a Director III as head, who shall be coterminous with the
appointing Chief Minister, and shall be assisted by support staff. It shall:
a.
b.
c.
d.

(5)

Provide support to the Chief Minister to determine that funds are properly accounted
for in accordance with existing auditing rules and regulations;
Undertake all operations relative to budget execution and control;
Issue sub-allotment advice to the different offices under the Office of the Chief
Minister in accordance with the approved work and financial plan in support of its
operational requirements;
Undertake regular management audit system reviews on organizational structures,
manpower and financial operations, and existing methods and procedures of the
Office of the Chief Minister and all agencies and offices under its supervision and
submit recommendation to the Chief Minister, for consideration;
Undertake a cost-benefit analysis on the financial requirements of the Office of the
Chief Minister, its attached agencies and offices under its supervision;
Adopt a system of proper recording of all financial transactions of the Office of the
Chief Minister and its attached agencies, in accordance with existing government
rules and regulations;
Ensure that all budgeting, accounting, and auditing rules and regulations are
observed and complied with by the Office of the Chief Minister and all agencies and
offices under the latter’s supervision;
Prepare and submit financial reports to the Chief Minister and other government
entities authorized to receive the same;
Implement an effective system of cashiering services in accordance with existing
government rules and regulations; and
Perform other functions as may be directed by the Chief Minister.

Prepare and implement approved security plans for the Office of the Chief Minister
and the entire Bangsamoro Government Center;
Gather and analyze intelligence reports to strengthen the security plan for the Office
of the Chief Minister, and ensure protection of lives, properties, and facilities of the
Bangsamoro Government Center;
Coordinate with the Philippine National Police, Armed Forces of the Philippines,
National Bureau of Investigation, and other security/peace keeping agencies in the
performance of its mandates; and
Perform other functions as may be directed by the Chief Minister.

Procurement Service - The Procurement Service shall be composed of Director III, as
head, and support staff. It shall:
a. Identify those supplies, materials, and such other items, including equipment and
construction materials, which can be economically purchased through central
procurement within the Office of the Chief Minister;
b. Determine the technical specifications of items that it will procure for the Office of
the Chief Minister and its attached agencies, offices, bureaus, or councils;
c. Identify the sources of supply which are able to offer the best prices, terms, and other
conditions for the items procured by the Bangsamoro Government;
Page 39

d. Procure and distribute supplies, materials and equipment needs of all operating units
in the Office of the Chief Minister and maintain all equipment, machineries, and
facilities in serviceable condition;
e. Properly store and warehouse items procured by the Office of the Chief Minister; and
f. Perform other functions as may be directed by the Chief Minister.
(6)

The Clinic - The Clinic shall be composed of the Medical Officer V as head, and support
staff. It shall:
a.
b.
c.
d.

(7)

Provide basic treatment for medical consultations at the Office of the Chief Minister
using standard treatment protocol;
Examine patients and investigate the diseases through available clinical examination
and other diagnostic tests, whenever necessary;
Review and follow up patients under treatment to ensure the completion of treatment
and monitor the progress of the patients;
Perform standard government medical clearances within the Office of the Chief
Minister.

Bangsamoro Satellite Coordinating Offices - The Chief Minister shall be represented
by his/her Deputy Chief Ministers in the Bangsamoro Satellite Coordinating Offices
(BASCOs), for Mainland and Island Provinces. The BASCOs shall:
a.
b.

Serve as coordinating offices of the Chief Minister in the represented sub-regions;
and
Perform other functions as directed by the Chief Minister or by his/her authorized
representative.

The Deputy Chief Ministers shall provide advisory or consultative services to the
Chief Minister on matters concerning their respective sub-region.
The Deputy Chief Ministers shall each be assisted by five (5) support staff assigned
to the BASCOs.
(8)

Bangsamoro Liaison Office in Metro Manila - The Chief Minister shall be represented
in the Bangsamoro Liaison Office in Metro Manila by a Director II, assisted by support
staff. The Office shall:
a. Serve as liaison office of the Chief Minister to international offices/embassies,
national offices/departments, agencies, and bureaus;
b. Provide administrative and technical support to the Chief Minister and BARMM
officials/employees while on official business in Metro Manila;
c. Coordinate with National Government Agencies in Metro Manila on matters related
to the BARMM;
d. Act as coordinating office of foreign scholarship programs; and
e. Perform other functions as directed by the Chief Minister or by his/her authorized
representative.
The Chief Minister may create other liaison offices within or outside the
Bangsamoro Autonomous Region, as may be necessary.

Page 40