La Transfobia in Italia, la più atroce e diffusa discriminazione contro le persone transgender - Progetto Gionata Skip to content More results... Generic selectors Exact matches only Search in title Search in content Post Type Selectors Search in posts Search in pages Filter by Categories called by name 2021 Online prayer liturgie Online prayer testimonies 2022 2023 2024 New lives polyphemille From the World pathswithgbtcouples Cornerstone I trust you Evangelicals 2026 2025 Gay christians Children What does the Bible say? LGBT Christians Gionata Tent testimonies Pastoral experiences 2016 English Stories of ordinary homophobia Français Gionata Tent Initiatives 2017 Parents Biblical meditations Christian lesbians Cure gays? Beyond ideology The debate in Churches Coming out 2020 Gionata tent walks with us Ebooks Christian transgender Spanish Beyond Gender Traces of reflection Insights Pink triangles Original news Rainbow Parents Christian Project LGBT+ initiatives Texts for lGBT Retreats Consecrated lives 2007 HIV positive Gionata Publications curtain In the family 2008 Christian Project LGBT+ Resources Other stories 2009 Christian Project LGBT+ Testimonies 2010 Christian Project LGBT+ Video 2011 2012 Evangelical Reflections 2013 Evangelical Stories Evangelical Questions 2014 Chronicles of ordinary homophobia Insights 2015 Chronicles of ordinary homophobia Report Letters to Gionata Appointments Faith and homosexuality Pastoral resources Testimonials Groups in Italy Press review Multimedia Volunteers of Gionata 2019 2018 Waking Uncategorized Uncategorised About us Jonathan's tent Groups Projects Cornerstone Project In Vigil Online prayer LGBT+ Christian Project 3timesGenitori Network Chronicles of ordinary homophobia I trust you Albano Evangelicals Resources Ways of accompaniment for gay and lesbian couples Faith and homosexuality The debate in the Churches What does the Bible say? Pastoral experiences Biblical meditations Traces of reflection Texts for lGBT Retreats Letters to Jonathan Appointments Stories Gay christians Christian lesbians Consecrated lives In family Sons Parents Coming out Rainbow Parents Cure gays? Beyond ideology Beyond Gender Pink triangles HIV positive Ebook Press review Multimedia Insights Inglese Français Español Sites&Blogs Katya's version Percorsi con coppie LGBT+ New lives The LGBT believing Ford in Milan Words and words 3TimesParents Homophobia.org Gay Christian Africa TWO LIVES. Stories of lGBTQ+ Migrants Davide: Christian parents group Born twice. We Christian Transgender Take the Largo, a group of LGBT Christians and their parents of Verona Pilgrimage 2025 Rainbow iRC Blog: Every single day Jonathan's diary LEV Blog Transitions Blog coming soon MartaBlog The streets of love ✉️ About us Jonathan's tent Groups Projects Cornerstone Project In Vigil Online prayer LGBT+ Christian Project 3timesGenitori Network Chronicles of ordinary homophobia I trust you Albano Evangelicals Resources Ways of accompaniment for gay and lesbian couples Faith and homosexuality The debate in the Churches What does the Bible say? Pastoral experiences Biblical meditations Traces of reflection Texts for lGBT Retreats Letters to Jonathan Appointments Stories Gay christians Christian lesbians Consecrated lives In family Sons Parents Coming out Rainbow Parents Cure gays? Beyond ideology Beyond Gender Pink triangles HIV positive Ebook Press review Multimedia Insights Inglese Français Español Sites&Blogs Katya's version Percorsi con coppie LGBT+ New lives The LGBT believing Ford in Milan Words and words 3TimesParents Homophobia.org Gay Christian Africa TWO LIVES. Stories of lGBTQ+ Migrants Davide: Christian parents group Born twice. We Christian Transgender Take the Largo, a group of LGBT Christians and their parents of Verona Pilgrimage 2025 Rainbow iRC Blog: Every single day Jonathan's diary LEV Blog Transitions Blog coming soon MartaBlog The streets of love ✉️ More results... Generic selectors Exact matches only Search in title Search in content Post Type Selectors Search in posts Search in pages Filter by Categories called by name 2021 Online prayer liturgie Online prayer testimonies 2022 2023 2024 New lives polyphemille From the World pathswithgbtcouples Cornerstone I trust you Evangelicals 2026 2025 Gay christians Children What does the Bible say? LGBT Christians Gionata Tent testimonies Pastoral experiences 2016 English Stories of ordinary homophobia Français Gionata Tent Initiatives 2017 Parents Biblical meditations Christian lesbians Cure gays? Beyond ideology The debate in Churches Coming out 2020 Gionata tent walks with us Ebooks Christian transgender Spanish Beyond Gender Traces of reflection Insights Pink triangles Original news Rainbow Parents Christian Project LGBT+ initiatives Texts for lGBT Retreats Consecrated lives 2007 HIV positive Gionata Publications curtain In the family 2008 Christian Project LGBT+ Resources Other stories 2009 Christian Project LGBT+ Testimonies 2010 Christian Project LGBT+ Video 2011 2012 Evangelical Reflections 2013 Evangelical Stories Evangelical Questions 2014 Chronicles of ordinary homophobia Insights 2015 Chronicles of ordinary homophobia Report Letters to Gionata Appointments Faith and homosexuality Pastoral resources Testimonials Groups in Italy Press review Multimedia Volunteers of Gionata 2019 2018 Waking Uncategorized Uncategorised Stories of ordinary homophobia / Chronicles of ordinary homophobia Report Contact the help service for LGBT+ Christians and their families Transphobia in Italy, the most atrocious and widespread discrimination against transgender people of Massimo Battaglio · November 20, 2024 Text by Massimo Battaglio In twelve years of research on data of violence and discrimination against LGBT+ people in Italy , we have noticed that transfobia always represents the most atrocious part, both quantitatively and from a "qualitative" point of view. The percentage of acts of transfobia has never dropped under 10% of the total cases detected. Indeed, it touched peaks of 19.5% in 2017 and 13.6% in the current year. This data takes on meaning if you think about the incidence of trans and homo-bisessual people on the national population. While in fact it is estimated that the total of LGBT+ individuals reaches 5%, that of non -Cisgender people stops at 0.1% of the total and therefore 2% of the LGBT+ population. This means that transfobia, which affects more than 10% of homophobic acts, focuses on 2% of the affected population. That is to say that being trans is twenty times more dangerous than being gay, lesbians, bisexuals, queer. The phenomenon is even more serious if we consider the different types of homophobic act and early of the acts of traphobia: attacks on individual people, attacks in groups, homocides, suicides, attempted suicides, other non -physical acts. In fact, we discover that trans people are victims Of 18% of single aggressions, 4% of the multiple ones and even 54% of the murders, while covering 23% of suicides and 10% Of the different acts. In short: the most serious episodes of homophobia have seen trans people as victims and, in large majority, those m> F. The analysis of individuals episodes confirms the heinousness with which trans people are affected. In the last twelve months, the following episodes have been recorded: 21/11/2023 - Bari - At the University, Antonella, trans student, detaches an abusive and misogynist flyer from the bulletin board. The author grabs it for the wrist and procures various bruises. 11/01/2024 - Naples - Two trans girls are approaching violently by five strangers. One of the two is raped. 18/03/2024 - Catania - After an evening in the disco, a trans woman is deceived in an apartment and raped by two men. 25/03/2024 - Pontedera - An eighteen -year -old trans Coming Out. The father: "I don't want gay children, go" and, after quarrels, hunting him. Now he lives from one of his teachers. 02/04/2024 - Pontedera - Young Trans F> M announces the intention of changing sex in the workplace. It is fired with a pretext. 27/05/2024 - Vizzolo Predabissi - In the hospital, 22 -year -old trans boy on a stretcher in the emergency room is raped by a warehouse worker. 28/05/2024 - Vizzolo Predabissi - The trans boy referred to in the previous episode he throws himself from the fourth floor of the hospital and dies. 25/06/2024 - Vicenza - Trans massacre of barrels on the street. 26/06/2024 - Castel Fusano (Ostia) - Luke, trans sex worker disappears. His corpse will be found, thrown into the brushwood, on July 6, in a state of decomposition and with signs of violence. 07/13/2024 - Eboli - Girl tranci seventeenne is attacked and raped by a group of bullies when leaving a disco. 20/07/2024 - Lecce - five bullies target a trans prostitute, threaten it and repeatedly insult and launch them envelopes of urine on. 10/08/2024 - Castiglione in Teverina (VT) - Two trans girls attacked to the wine party from a group of ten energumens. 04/11/2024 - Fourth - lorena, trans girl, a complaint that was refused a job because the employers were looking for a "real woman". 05/11/2024 - Quarto - Lorena and dario denounce a series of episodes of homophobic violence against them, with the launch of stones and chestnuts by a baby gang. Particularly bloody are the 21 murders due to transphobia. We report them below, starting from October 2012 to date: 28/10/2012 Rivazzurra - transsexual woman stabbed in her apartment 18/11/2012 Rome - Transsexual woman found dead on the street 29/07/2013 Rome - Transsexual woman found dead in Termini. 21/01/2014 Vecchiano (PI) - 25 year old transsexual of Brazilian origin, brutally stabbed. 02/02/2015 Castel Volturno - Trans drugged and killed by a group of Nigerians. 14/02/2015 Bergamo - Trans killed to stab wounds in his house. 13/03/2016 Naples - Trans prostitute exchanged for a biological woman by a client, who kills her. 29/07/2016 Rome - The corpse of a trans is found on the field, with signs of violence, closed in a sack. 23/08/2016 Brescia - Marta Baroni, 34 years old, trans, is found dead in a garbage bag. 04/02/2018 Cinisello - Finding of a trans found. It is murder. 23/09/2018 Bari - Killed 40 -year -old transcended with a stab wound on the vein. 01/15/2020 Frosinone - found 50 -year -old corpse in his own home. Transfobic murder. 15/02/2020 Rome - The corpse of a trans found on the banks of the Tiber, hidden under a mattress. 19/07/2020 MILAN - Trans found stabbed in her apartment. The crazy gesture of a customer is assumed. 17/08/2020 Vallo (SA) - Trans found stabbed at the reception house for homelessness in which she lived. 12/09/2020 Caivano (NA) Girl on a scooter and her partner Trans F> M are in order to be regarded by her brother because he does not accept the relationship. She died, he wounded. 22/06/2021 Rome - The corpse of a trans woman woman killed and thrown in a drain channel was found. 05/06/2022 Sarzana - Camilla, trans, killed in her car. The corpse is found in a stream on June 9th 05/10/2022 Ardea (Rome) - Trans found dead in a hotel room. 25/05/2023 Rimini - Trans found dead on the sidewalk of a hotel. It was thrown from the sixth floor. 06/26/2024 Castel Fusano (Ostia) - Luke, trans Sex Worker disappears. His corpse will be found, thrown into the brushwood, on July 6, in a state of decomposition and with signs of violence. Tomorrow, November 20, 2024, all people victims of transphobia and particularly qulle killed in the last twelve months will be Remembered. worldwide, they were 375. in Italy, This Year, there was only one murder (against the 5 recorded In the year 2020). It is a lower figure to the average, since the Italian population is 0.8% of the world one while the murder of Lucero, which took place on June 26, represents 0.27% of those that occurred. But it is the first year that there is only one case. In 2020, 1% of the murders took place, a percentage higher than that of Brazil, a country that has always held the sad record had been exceeded. Discover the other data and numbers on homophobia.org . Share Tag: Newsletter They may also be interested in ... When homophobia hides in everyday life July 1, 2026 Remembering Paolo Seganti, a life too short June 11, 2026 “Chronicles of ordinary homophobia” in Italy April 17, 2026 Follow us: Next article Marceus-Reid's "indecent" theology "indecent" Previous article When will Jesus stop looking for sins where there is only love? Newsletters Leave this field empty if you are human: Download this free ebook “Beyond the gaze”: a guide for pediatrics that can accommodate gender variance Evangelicals / Gay christians / Evangelical Stories Ero stato cacciato perché gay. Oggi una comunità cristiana mi ha restituito una casa Christian lesbians From lake como A christian lesbian tells her story Evangelicals / Transgender christians / Evangelical Stories Negli Stati Uniti un sacerdote transgender è stato nominato alla guida di una cattedrale episcopale Parents / Testimonials Lettera di una madre cattolica al figlio gay Consecrated lives / Testimonials Essere sacerdoti o essere se stessi? La storia d’amore di Melqui e Denisson Letters to Jonathan Words that hurt: when even pain becomes a target Contact Us RSS of articles Privacy and Cookie policy Change cookie Consent Gionata Project © 2026. Creative Commons Non commercial (CC By-NC-SA 4.0) La Tenda di Gionata Ets -OOV - Via Castronella 21, 50013 Campi Bisenzio (FI) - Cf. 9427530486 Powered by - Designed with hueman Theme We use cookies to offer a better navigation experience and analyze the traffic of the site. By clicking on "Accept all cookies" consent to the use of cookies, for more information or to provide personalized consent click "Edit preferences". You can revoke your consent at any time in "Cookie Consent" modification, which you will find at the bottom of our site. Edit preferences Accept all cookies Change cookie Consent Close Privacy overview This site uses cookies to improve your experience while browsing the site. Of these, the cookies classified as necessary are stored in the browser as they are essential for the functioning of the basic features of the website. We also use third -party cookies that help us analyze and understand how you use this website. These cookies will be stored in your browser only with your consent. You also have the opportunity to deactivate these cookies. However, the deactivation of some of these cookies could affect your navigation experience. Read everything Essential Essential Always enabled The necessary cookies are absolutely essential for the correct functioning of the website. These cookies guarantee the basic features and website safety characteristics, anonymously. Cookie Lifespan Description CookieLawInfoConsent 1 year Records the default button state of the corpsontding category & the status of CCPA. IT wORCS only in coordination with the primary cookie. cookielawinfo-Checkbox-Advertisement 1 year Set by the GDPR Cookie Consent Plugin, This Cookie is used to record the user allow for the cookies in the "Advertisement" category. cookielawinfo-Checkbox-Analytics 11 months This cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent plugin. The cookie is used to store the user allow for the cookies in the category "Analytics". cookielawinfo-checkbox-others 11 months This cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent plugin. The cookie is used to store the user allow for the cookies in the category "Other. viewed_cookie_policy 11 months The cookie is set by the GDPR Cookie Concent plugin and is used to store wherele or not user has allowed to the use of cookies. It does not store any personal data. cookielawinfo-Checkbox-Necessary 11 months This cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent plugin. The cookies is used to store the user consent for the cookies in the category "Neva". cookielawinfo-Checkbox-Functional 11 months The cookie is set by GDPR cookie concent to record the user consent for the cookies in the category "Functional". cookielawinfo-Checkbox-Performance 11 months This cookie is set by GDPR Cookie Consent plugin. The cookie is used to store the user allow for the cookies in the category "performance". Functional Functional Functional cookies help to perform certain features such as sharing the content of the website on social media platforms, collect feedback and other third -party features. Performance Performance Performance cookies are used to understand and analyze the key performance indices of the website that help to provide a better user experience for visitors. Cookie Lifespan Description _gat 1 minute This cookie is installed by Google Universal Analytics to restrain request rate and thus limit the collection of data on high traffic sites. Analytics/statistics Analytics/Statistics Analytical or statistics cookies are used to understand how visitors interact with the website. These cookies help to provide information on the metrics of the number of visitors, rebound frequency, source of traffic, etc. Cookie Lifespan Description _ga 2 years The _ga cookie, installed by Google Analytics, calculates visitor, session and campaign data and also keeps track of site usage for the site's analytics report. The cookie stores information anonymously and assigns a randomly generated number to recognize unique visitors. _gid 1 day Installed by Google Analytics, _gid cookie stores information on how visitors use a website, while also creating an analytics report of the website's performance. Some of the data that are collected includes the number of visitors, their source, and the pages ayy visit anonymously. CONSENT 2 years YouTube sets this cookie via embedded youTube-Videos and registers anonymous statistical data. Advertising Advertisers Advertising cookies are used to provide visitors to relevant marketing ads and campaigns. These cookies keep track of visitors on websites and collect information to provide personalized ads. Cookie Lifespan Description NID 6 months Nid cookie, set by Google, is used for advertising purifies; to limit the number of times the user sees an ad, to mute unwanted ads, and to measure the effectiveness of ads. YSC session YSC cookie is set by YouTube and is used to track the view of embedded video on Youtube pages. VISITOR_INFO1_LIVE 5 months 27 days A Cookie Set by YouTube to Measure Bandwidth That Determines When the User Gets the New Old Player Interface. yt-remote-device-id never YouTube sets this cookie to store the video preferences of the user user embedded YouTube video. yt-remote-connected-devices never YouTube sets this cookie to store the video preferences of the user user embedded YouTube video. Other Other Other un classified cookies are those that are analyzed and have not yet been classified in a category. Cookie Lifespan Description aHlgkLp 1 day No description tWSDP-A 1 day No description ITlaYKwjmpcWoz 1 day No description ACCEPT AND SAVE Powered by Italian English Spanish French Polish