Netherlands | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Netherlands At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Legal Gender Recognition Possible? Yes LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? Yes Last Update: March 12, 2026 In the Netherlands, public opinion and laws about LGBTIQ people are progressive, but gaps remain. Same-sex couples can marry and adopt, and transgender people can change their legal gender markers through a process that still requires an expert letter by a medical professional, falling short of full self-determination. The Dutch government has offered compensation to individuals who underwent surgery or sterilization due to previous legal requirements for changing gender markers. Nonbinary people can choose to use the gender marker “X,” but only through a court procedure that takes three to nine months. In July 2025, the Dutch government officially withdrew the much-debated Transgender Act. The proposed bill established a simpler administrative process for gender registration change, abolishing the mandatory expert statement from a psychologist or doctor and emphasizing self-determination. It would have allowed for the change of gender registration for young people under the age of 16 via a court procedure and with the consent of parents or a guardian. However, in December 2025 , the Dutch parliament narrowly voted 77-73 to restart the debate . In September 2025, the House of Representatives (Tweede Kamer) passed a bill criminalizing certain forms of conversion practices. The bill punishes anyone who “in the exercise of an office, profession or business, or in the context of an organization, systematically or otherwise in an intrusive manner performs acts with the intention of changing or suppressing the sexual orientation or gender identity of a person.” The measure awaits its passage in the Senate (Eerste Kamer), expected in early 2026. A tightening of the Dutch Asylum Policy in 2024 created an insidious trap for queer migrants and refugees. The new rules only permit married partners to join people with a refugee status in the Netherlands, effectively excluding same-sex couples from countries where same-sex unions are not legally recognized. The General Equal Treatment Law prohibits discrimination based on sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, and sex characteristics in employment, goods and services, and education. Nonconsensual medical interventions on intersex children are not banned and still occur . In July 2025, the Netherlands modernized its penal code to reformulate protections for hate crimes. The updated law replaced “heterosexual or homosexual orientation” with “sexual orientation.” It does not address hate crimes based on gender identity, gender expression, or sex characteristics. Public opinion is highly supportive—in several surveys on social acceptance of same-sex marriage, the Netherlands ranks the highest in Europe. Additionally, the Netherlands was ranked second out of 175 countries for average social acceptance of LGBTI people between 2017 and 2020. However, data from the Dutch health service indicate a decline in LGBT+ acceptance among youth. A study published in 2025 shows that the acceptance and well-being of different sexual and gender minorities vary significantly . For example, there is more understanding and acceptance of lesbian and gay people (86 percent) compared to bisexual people (66 percent), while acceptance of nonbinary people (53 percent) lags behind that of other people of queer experience. When it comes to safety and discrimination, most groups of LGBTIQ people feel unsafe more often, are more often victims of violent crime, and experience more discrimination than non-LGBTIQ people. Transgender, nonbinary, and intersex people often experience physical violence, while bisexual women face sexually transgressive behavior, as the study highlights. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International