Swiss drag queen faces Chinese repression - SWI swissinfo.ch Jump to home page Jump to navigation Jump to horizontal navigation Go to language selection Jump to content The Swiss voice in the world since 1935 Home About us Search Sections Geopolitics Democracy Science Swiss Identity Economy Swiss Abroad Latest News Swiss Films Videos Podcasts Debates Special Reports Opinions Newsletters Ask Swissinfo Guide to Switzerland Switzerland How-To Education in Switzerland Tourism Trends Housing in Switzerland Follow us Why you can trust Swissinfo en English en Deutsch de Français fr Italiano it Español es Português pt 日本語 ja العربية ar 中文 zh Русский ru My profile Bookmarks Personal feed Sign in Personal feed Sign in to add topics to your feed. Sign in now Bookmarks Sign in to add articles to your saved list. Sign in now Geopolitics Democracy Science Swiss Identity Economy Swiss Abroad International Geneva Human rights Global health Geneva organisations Global trade Humanitarian aid Swiss diplomacy Neutrality International cooperation Top Stories Six takeaways from the rejection of the neutrality initiative Read more: Six takeaways from the rejection of the neutrality initiative Swiss vote on how neutrality should be understood Read more: Swiss vote on how neutrality should be understood What’s behind the US decision not to invite OSCE election observers Read more: What’s behind the US decision not to invite OSCE election observers An advocate for the laws of war in a world that no longer believes in them Read more: An advocate for the laws of war in a world that no longer believes in them Podcasts Inside Geneva Read more: Inside Geneva Newsletter Our newsletter on geopolitics Read more: Our newsletter on geopolitics International Geneva Read more: International Geneva Swiss democracy Information wars Digital Democracy Global elections Top stories Swiss neutrality and food security initiatives suffer hefty defeat Read more: Swiss neutrality and food security initiatives suffer hefty defeat Swiss democracy in the crosshairs of Russian propaganda Read more: Swiss democracy in the crosshairs of Russian propaganda What’s behind the US decision not to invite OSCE election observers Read more: What’s behind the US decision not to invite OSCE election observers Swiss democracy How Swiss direct democracy works Read more: How Swiss direct democracy works Newsletter Our democracy newsletter Read more: Our democracy newsletter Climate solutions Glaciers & permafrost CO2 reduction Climate adaptation Energy transition Research frontiers Swiss AI Space research Top stories Fuel threat lingers beneath buried Swiss mountain village Read more: Fuel threat lingers beneath buried Swiss mountain village Swiss heatwaves linked to 600 premature deaths Read more: Swiss heatwaves linked to 600 premature deaths Switzerland’s worst-case climate scenario now more likely, say scientists Read more: Switzerland’s worst-case climate scenario now more likely, say scientists Cyber flaws in solar systems pose risks to Swiss power grid Read more: Cyber flaws in solar systems pose risks to Swiss power grid Podcasts The Swiss Connection Podcast: Hear Swiss science stories for the world Read more: The Swiss Connection Podcast: Hear Swiss science stories for the world Newsletter Our science newsletter Read more: Our science newsletter Demographics Assisted suicide Culture Swiss cinema Swiss fine arts Future of Work AI & Work History Top stories Self-determination over religious freedom: Zurich sends strong signal on assisted dying Read more: Self-determination over religious freedom: Zurich sends strong signal on assisted dying Nuclidium CEO: ‘Our challenge remains the demonstration of clinical efficacy and utility’ Read more: Nuclidium CEO: ‘Our challenge remains the demonstration of clinical efficacy and utility’ Having children is a luxury in Switzerland. Is the US next? Read more: Having children is a luxury in Switzerland. Is the US next? How poring over old journals gives insight into right-wing extremism today Read more: How poring over old journals gives insight into right-wing extremism today Debate To what extent do you think assisted suicide should be a legally available option to those who want to end their lives? Read more: To what extent do you think assisted suicide should be a legally available option to those who want to end their lives? Newsletter Culture stories by SWI swissinfo.ch Read more: Culture stories by SWI swissinfo.ch Medicine access Drug pricing Patient safety Pharma supply chains Health systems Health innovation Prevention AI and medicine New treatments Agribusiness Food supply chains Food safety Top stories Swiss heatwaves linked to 600 premature deaths Read more: Swiss heatwaves linked to 600 premature deaths How a handful of big agriculture companies have taken over food production Read more: How a handful of big agriculture companies have taken over food production Why Putin is placing Nestlé under compulsory administration Read more: Why Putin is placing Nestlé under compulsory administration Revolut seeks to challenge Swiss banking sector Read more: Revolut seeks to challenge Swiss banking sector How transparent is a Swiss hospital bill really? Read more: How transparent is a Swiss hospital bill really? Iron ore trader Radiant alleges Glencore hid their ties from audited records Read more: Iron ore trader Radiant alleges Glencore hid their ties from audited records Podcasts Reality hits: hard truths come to light in the final episode of ‘Lost Cells’ Read more: Reality hits: hard truths come to light in the final episode of ‘Lost Cells’ Newsletter Business stories by SWI swissinfo.ch Read more: Business stories by SWI swissinfo.ch Swiss abroad community Swiss politics Votes Moving abroad Swiss oddities Top stories Are the Swiss Abroad a drain or a gain for Switzerland? Read more: Are the Swiss Abroad a drain or a gain for Switzerland? Twenty-five years after 9/11: ‘I’ve never spoken about it until now’ Read more: Twenty-five years after 9/11: ‘I’ve never spoken about it until now’ From grey skies to heatwaves: climate drives Swiss abroad Read more: From grey skies to heatwaves: climate drives Swiss abroad Stay in touch with Switzerland The SWIplus app: your connection to Switzerland Read more: The SWIplus app: your connection to Switzerland Human rights Swiss drag queen faces Chinese repression Swiss drag queen faces Chinese repression SRF/Samuel Emch In China, the space available for queer subcultures is shrinking. A drag artist from Zurich experienced this first-hand while on tour. Listen to the article Listening the article Toggle language selector Select your language Close English (US) English (British) Generated with artificial intelligence. Listening: Swiss drag queen faces Chinese repression Close Share This content was published on August 20, 2026 - 10:30 4 minutes Samuel Emch, SRF Other languages: 3 Deutsch de Schweizer Dragqueen trifft auf chinesische Repression Read more: Schweizer Dragqueen trifft auf chinesische Repression 日本語 ja スイスのドラァグクイーン、中国で弾圧の壁に直面 Read more: スイスのドラァグクイーン、中国で弾圧の壁に直面 中文 zh 瑞士变装皇后在中国遭遇打压 Read more: 瑞士变装皇后在中国遭遇打压 In a small venue in Kunming, southern China, ‘Soya the Cow’ is rehearsing her act. The Zurich-based drag queen – or ‘Drag Cow’, as she calls herself – tackles themes including how humans treat animals and homosexuality in the animal kingdom. Whether her show can go ahead later that afternoon, however, is far from certain. “The tour started in Shanghai. But the performance there was cancelled,” says performer Daniel Hellmann. The gallery’s explanation was that it already needed the rooms for the next exhibition that day. “That sounds very much like an excuse, of course.” Other venues also turned the drag queen down. She and her stage partner, ‘Piano Prince’, have to look for alternatives. “It really was like an obstacle course.” Previous Drag artist Daniel Hellmann received many last-minute cancellations during his tour of China. SRF/Samuel Emch Even so, for the Swiss drag queen, life in China isn’t all black and white. “There are many shades of grey,” says Daniel Hellmann. SRF/Samuel Emch Next Picture 1 Picture 2 Venues that had originally been booked suddenly no longer wanted ‘Soya the Cow’ on their stages. This was also the case in Kunming, Zurich’s twin city. The organisers there cited a phone call from the police as the reason for the cancellation. The crew found an alternative venue. “But that one pulled out too, and then things were really up in the air. Can we even put on the show anywhere at all?” says Hellmann. Alongside repression, there is support The Swiss drag queen is repeatedly confronted with contradictions on her journey through China. “I had to laugh out loud. After all these problems, for example, we meet loads of female artists,” says Hellmann. One of them was a 57-year-old who has been performing drag in Kunming for 30 years. “And I asked: ‘How do you manage that?’ She said: ‘Mostly on behalf of the government for HIV prevention.’” External Content In China, restrictions and support can coexist. “There are somehow far more nuances that are difficult to discern from the outside,” says the drag artist. Doesn’t fit the government’s conservative worldview What is easier to recognise is that repression is on the rise while support for queer subculture is waning – particularly in recent months and years. This is according to an internationally renowned drag queen from Shanghai. “I haven’t performed in Shanghai for six months because it’s impossible. Drag queens are a sensitive issue.” External Content They are considered sensitive because they do not fit into the government’s conservative view of society and are said to represent Western – and therefore decadent – values. Just a few years ago, there was a drag show somewhere in Shanghai every week. During Pride Month, there were numerous events and the queer community was visible in public life. Drag advertising for international brands is a thing of the past “I remember filming adverts for major international brands in 2019, which were shown on huge screens along Shanghai’s most famous shopping street,” says the drag queen from Shanghai. “The brands would approach us every year for their Pride Month campaigns. But all of that disappeared within a few years of the pandemic ending.” The Shanghai-based drag queen now performs exclusively abroad. Not only have drag shows disappeared, but gay and lesbian bars are being closed, queer events banned and exhibitions with gay themes halted by the authorities. Back at the venue in Kunming. Thanks to considerable support from local scene insiders, creative organisers and additional precautionary measures, the Swiss drag queen is able to perform after all. Late one afternoon, in a bar whose windows have been covered to keep out both the light and prying eyes, the show goes ahead. The Chinese audience is delighted. Reactions to Switzerland’s performance “I really enjoyed it. It was sexy, crazy, funny. I could say so many more positive things,” says one visitor. A visibly moved female visitor says she’d been afraid too. “I thought the police would turn up and shut the whole thing down. I was so worried. In our community, we can’t post anything on social media, because otherwise someone will come straight away and tell us that such activities aren’t allowed. That’s why I’m so happy that this performance went ahead.” Despite the harassment, China’s queer community is still finding spaces to express itself. But these are becoming increasingly scarce. Join the discussion: External Content Translated from German, sub-edited by Alexandra An drist/ ac In compliance with the JTI standards More: SWI swissinfo.ch certified by the Journalism Trust Initiative You can find an overview of ongoing debates with our journalists here . Please join us! If you want to start a conversation about a topic raised in this article or want to report factual errors, email us at english@swissinfo.ch . Read more Back to top Follow us Stay informed daily about news in Switzerland with our Briefing in the SWI plus app for the Swiss abroad. Imprint Data Privacy Statement Terms of Use Rights to content and liability Privacy settings Jobs Play SWI About us Annual Report 2025 Newsletters Podcasts Contact SWI swissinfo.ch - a branch of Swiss Broadcasting Corporation SRG SSR RTS SRF RSI RTR SWI swissinfo.ch - a branch of Swiss Broadcasting Corporation SRG SSR Close Sign in and personalize Swissinfo Follow Topics Stay up to date with your preferred topics. Bookmarks Save articles for later. Sign in Later Close Personal feed Close Select topics that interest you. Something went wrong. Please try again. Save Cancel /* Download_on_the_App_Store_Badge_DE_RGB_blk_092917 ","app-store-en":" Download_on_the_App_Store_Badge_US-UK_RGB_blk_4SVG_092917 ","app-store-fr":" Download_on_the_App_Store_Badge_FR_RGB_blk_100517 ","app-store-it":" Download_on_the_App_Store_Badge_IT_RGB_blk_100317 ","arrow-caret-down":" ","arrow-caret-left":" ","arrow-caret-right":" ","arrow-caret-top":" ","buzzsprout-amazon-music":" ","buzzsprout-apple-podcasts":" ","buzzsprout-castbox":" ","buzzsprout-castro":" ","buzzsprout-deezer":" ","buzzsprout-goodpods":" ","buzzsprout-iheartradio":" ","buzzsprout-listen-notes":" ","buzzsprout-overcast":" ","buzzsprout-pandora":" ","buzzsprout-player-fm":" ","buzzsprout-pocket-casts":" ","buzzsprout-podcast-addict":" ","buzzsprout-podcast-index":" ","buzzsprout-podchaser":" ","buzzsprout-spotify":" ","buzzsprout-subscribe-link":" ","buzzsprout-truefans":" ","buzzsprout-youtube":" ","caret-right":" ","carousel-next":" ","carousel-previous":" ","chevron-bottom":" ","chevron-down":" ","chevron-right":" ","chevron-top-small":" ","chevron-top":" ","double-arrow-caret-left":" ","double-arrow-caret-right":" ","flag-blank":" ","flag-es":" ","flag-gb":" ","flag-mx":" <path d=\"M10.3135 8.25467V8.23915C10.3678 8.27795 10.4609 8.28571 10.4609 8.28571C10.6704 8.34003 10.7325 8.40211 10.748 8.41763C10.77