Combating discrimination and violence against LGBTIQ+ people in the Netherlands | Government.nl Go to content To the homepage of Government.nl Government of the Netherlands Home Themes Justice, security and defence Gender equality and LGBTIQ+ equality Enter what you are looking for Combating discrimination and violence against LGBTIQ+ people in the Netherlands Lesbian women, gay men and bisexual, transgender and intersex people still experience discrimination, intimidation and violence. The Dutch government wants to take action to tackle and prevent this. Discrimination and violence against LGBTIQ+ people on the rise In 2022 one third of all reports to the police about discrimination concerned sexual orientation. More than 10% of LGBTIQ+ people have experienced physical or sexual violence. The figures for transgender and intersex people are 17% and 22% respectively. According to the 2023 National Programme against Discrimination and Racism , the number of incidents of verbal abuse, intimidation and violence directed at LGBTIQ+ people have also increased sharply. What does LGBTIQ+ stand for? The letters LGBTIQ stand for lesbian women, gay men, bi+ people, transgender people, intersex people and queer people. The + stands for other categories of people who are not cisgender or heterosexual. LGBTIQ+ people attacked or intimidated for being ‘different’ People who attack or intimidate LGBTIQ+ people often have ingrained ideas about how women and men should behave or look (stereotypes). Some people become irritated or angry when they encounter people who behave differently, for example, men or women who dress very extravagantly or people of the same sex holding hands. Measures to combat violence against LGBTIQ+ people in the Netherlands The government is taking measures to combat violence against LGBTIQ+ people. These measures include: Safe streets, parks and other public spaces Municipalities involved with the Rainbow Cities programme receive funding from central Dutch government to promote equality for LGBTIQ+ people. Rainbow municipalities are working on tackling violence against LGBTIQ+ people in public spaces, for example by providing safe places for young LGBTIQ+ people to meet or by organising information sessions at schools, sport clubs and hospitals on equal rights for LGBTIQ+ people. LGBTIQ+ people who are harassed in public places are more likely to report this if their municipality is involved with the programme, according to the 2022 Rainbow Cities evaluation (in Dutch). The Rainbow Cities programme has been extended to 2026 (in Dutch). Sexual harassment in public is a criminal offence Under the new Sex Offences Act (in Dutch) that entered into effect on 1 July 2024, sexual harassment is now a criminal offence. When reporting sexual assault or rape, it is no longer necessary to provide evidence that force was used. Tougher sentences for discrimination-related violence A bill introducing tougher sentencing for violent offences motivated by discrimination has been submitted to parliament. The bill introducing higher sentences for violent crimes motivated by discrimination (in Dutch) has not yet been examined by parliament. Reducing violence committed against young people (18-25) because of their sexual orientation or gender Central government provides a grant to Act4Respect, an organisation working to prevent violence committed against people because of their sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression or gender characteristics (in Dutch). Improving the social safety of LGBTIQ+ refugees and migrants Central government provides a grant to Change from Within an alliance working to achieve equality, safety and acceptance for LGBTIQ+ people (in Dutch), an alliance working to achieve equality, safety and acceptance for LGBTIQ+ people, especially in more closed communities such as faith-based communities. Challenging stereotypes about masculinity Central government provides a grant and other support to Emancipator, an organisation working to prevent violent masculinity (in Dutch) and help free men from traditional male gender roles. More measures More measures to improve the safety of LGBTIQ+ people (in Dutch) are detailed at Emancipatienota.nl. Measures to combat discrimination against LGBTIQ+ people in the Netherlands Central government is taking the following measures to combat discrimination against LGBTIQ+ people: Pilot project with antidiscrimination detectives At some police stations specialised antidiscrimination detectives help colleagues with cases that are believed to involve discrimination. When a victim of violence reports an incident to police, these detectives are brought in to help determine whether racism or another form of discrimination was involved. Central government is funding this pilot project with special detectives from the Expertise Centre for Tackling Discrimination (ECAD-P) until summer 2025. Recognising discrimination part of police training Police officers are being given more training at the Police College in recognising discrimination. The training includes information about the consequences for victims, legislation and rules on discrimination, and discrimination within the police force. Reporting incidents to LGBTIQ+ police officers LGBTIQ+ police officers from the Pink in Blue team can help LGBTIQ+ people if they want to report discrimination or assault. Confidential advisers for LGBTIQ+ refugees LGBTIQ+ asylum seekers in reception centres are often afraid of violence and discrimination linked to their orientation. They can speak to an LGBTIQ+ confidential adviser (website in Dutch). LGBTIQ+ public servants LGBTIQ+ people working for the government have set up the Dutch Government Pride platform (in Dutch). The objective of the platform is to ensure that all LGBTIQ+ people experience the work floor as a safe and supportive environment. Information on sexuality and sexual diversity at schools Central government is funding teaching materials for schools on sex, sexual resilience and sexual gender diversity. For an overview of teaching materials and methods on sexual diversity , see the School and Safety Foundation knowledge base. More measures More measures relating to equal rights for LGBTIQ+ people are detailed at Emancipatienota.nl. Measures for safer schools for LGBTIQ+ people LGBTIQ+ pupils and teachers sometimes feel unsafe being open about their sexual orientation or gender identity. The government wants schools to provide a safe learning environment. Measures to achieve this include: Making LGBTIQ+ students more resilient The government provides grants to pupils and teachers who stand up for LGBTIQ+ rights and work together through the Gender & Sexuality Alliances (GSA). LGBTIQ+ pupils feel more accepted and skip school less often if there are GSA representatives at their school, according to research conducted by the GSA in 2018. Focus on sexual and gender diversity in vocational education Since 2021 secondary vocational education institutions (MBOs) have covered sexual and gender diversity in citizenship classes. This was already mandatory in primary and secondary schools. Discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation is a criminal offence in the Netherlands In 2023 discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation was made a criminal offence. Sexual orientation has been added to the characteristics protected from discrimination in article 1 of the Dutch Constitution . Other languages Nederlands Papiamento Papiamentu Service Contact Documents RSS Sitemap Help Archive About this site Copyright Privacy Cookies Use of AI Accessibility Report vulnerability Back to top