Romania | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Romania At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Legal Gender Recognition Possible? Yes LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? Yes Last Update: March 12, 2026 In 2000, Romania issued Government Ordinance (GO) no. 137/2000 on “the prevention and sanctioning of all forms of discrimination” on grounds including “sex,” “sexual orientation,” and “membership of a disadvantaged group.” Since then, however, institutional efforts to advance LGBTIQ equality have been limited. The government does not recognize same-sex marriages or civil unions, with the Romanian Orthodox Church emerging in 2017 as a key opponent to a civil partnerships bill. In 2018, Romania held a referendum to ban same-sex unions in the constitution, which failed due to low turnout. In May 2023, the European Court of Human Rights ruled that the domestic laws of Romania that prohibited same-sex unions were in violation of the right to “privacy and family life” under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights, but the government has defied the ruling . Although transgender people can change their legal gender markers, this process is fairly inaccessible, inconsistent, and requires surgical intervention. In 2021, the requirement for transgender people to undergo surgery before they could attain legal gender recognition was recognized by the European Court of Human Rights as an “impossible dilemma,” ruling that it violates Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights. In 2024, the European Court of Justice ruled that Romania must recognize a citizen’s change of first name and gender marker made legally in another EU country. During the 2024 national elections , an openly gay candidate ran for public office for the first time . In response to LGBTIQ movement advocacy and despite public backlash, the Central Electoral Bureau released and implemented guidelines for polling staff “on how to interact with transgender people when they go to the polling station.” Romanian MEP Nicolae Ștefănuță, who signed advocacy organization ILGA-Europe’s “Come Out 4 Europe” pledge and ran on an LGBTIQ-supportive platform as a self-proclaimed voice of the “Equality Generation,” became one of the 14 vice presidents of the European Parliament. Despite these positive developments, election cycles were marked by a sharp increase in transphobic and other anti-LGBTIQ political rhetoric, as certain political actors instrumentalized polarizing debates on gender identity to garner support. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International