Peruvian Congress Votes to Remove LGBT from Hate Crime Legislation | The Perchy Bird The Perchy Bird Skip to content About Peruvian Congress Votes to Remove LGBT from Hate Crime Legislation After a heated debate extending into early Friday, politicians in Peru voted 66-29 to remove LGBT from the hate crime legislation brought into law through a Presidential Decree earlier this year. For the first 90 days of his tenure, President Pedro Pablo Kuczynski of the Party For Change, was granted the customary permission by Congress to tackle several of Peru’s issues via decree and took advantage of that right to extend the scope of what registers as a hate crime in the existing Peruvian Penal Code to include sexual orientation and gender identity. His decree came into effect in January of 2017. Members of the largest party in Congress, Popular Force, whose leader narrowly lost to Kuczynksi in the last Presidential race, were joined by members of the Alliance For Progress in pushing the vote to repeal the section of the decree protecting LGBT from discrimination, persecution and incitement to hatred after claiming that the President was not assigned the power to take this step. The topic became a controversial one after more than a million signatures were said to be added to a petition calling for the removal of the LGBT terms in the new Penal Code. A Constitutional Committee previously voted in April in favor of a repeal and sent the motion to the plenary where conservative parties hold a majority of seats. Following Friday’s vote, Peru returns to being one of three South American countries with no anti-discrimination laws covering its LGBT population along with Paraguay and Guyana. Spread the word if you are perched: Share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Share on X (Opens in new window) X Share on Tumblr (Opens in new window) Tumblr Like Loading... Leave a comment Cancel reply May 6, 2017 The Perchy Bird Anti-discrimination , Gay , Latin America , LGBT , Peru , South America Anti-discrimination , Gay , Latin America , LGBT , Peru , South America Post navigation Danish Parliament Ratifies Faroe Islands’ Same-sex Marriage Law Same-sex Couples Can Now Marry on the Island of Guernsey Search Subscribe to Blog via Email Enter your email address to subscribe to this blog and receive notifications of new posts by email. Email Address: Subscribe Join 32 other subscribers Follow The Perchy Bird on WordPress.com perchybird@gmail.com View theperchybird’s profile on Twitter Recent Posts Georgia’s Parliament Passes Constitutional Ban On Same-sex Marriage Faroe Islands’ Same-sex Marriage Bill Receives Royal Assent Same-sex Couples Can Now Marry on the Island of Guernsey Peruvian Congress Votes to Remove LGBT from Hate Crime Legislation Danish Parliament Ratifies Faroe Islands’ Same-sex Marriage Law Categories Categories Select Category Adoption Antarctica Anti-discrimination Aruba Asia Australia Austria Bermuda British Antarctica Territory British Crown Dependency British Overseas Territory Caribbean Caucasus Central America Church Civil unions Colombia Constitution Costa Rica Croatia Denmark Ecuador El Salvador Eurasia Europe European Court of Human Rights Falkland Islands Faroe Islands Finland Gay Georgia Gibraltar Greenland Guernsey Isle of Man Israel Italy Kingdom of the Netherlands Latin America LGBT Marriage Marriage Ban Mexico North America Norway Oceania Permit Peru Portugal Recap Referendum Romania San Marino Slovenia South America Switzerland Trans Transgender Uncategorized Veto Recent Comments The Perchy Bird on Mexico: Chihuahua Halts Same-s… Ray Taylor (@rayt009… on Mexico: Chihuahua Halts Same-s… The Perchy Bird on Faroe Islands Approves Same-se… Kyle (@KOL_9692) on Faroe Islands Approves Same-se… The Perchy Bird on Aruba Approves Civil Unio… Archives September 2017 May 2017 April 2017 March 2017 February 2017 September 2016 August 2016 June 2016 May 2016 April 2016 March 2016 February 2016 January 2016 Meta Create account Log in Entries feed Comments feed WordPress.com Blog at WordPress.com. Comment Reblog Subscribe Subscribed The Perchy Bird Join 32 other subscribers Sign me up Have a WordPress.com account? Log in now. Privacy The Perchy Bird Copy shortlink View post in Reader Manage subscriptions Sign up Log in Report this content Collapse this bar Loading Comments... You must be logged in to post a comment. %d Design a site like this with WordPress.com Get started