‘It’s time for us to be louder’: Germany’s Pride parades face up to rise in attacks | Germany | The Guardian Skip to main content Skip to navigation Close dialogue 1 / 4 Next image Previous image Toggle caption Print subscriptions Search jobs Sign in Eur Europe edition UK edition US edition Australia edition International edition The Guardian - Back to home The Guardian News Opinion Sport Culture Lifestyle Show more Hide expanded menu News View all News World news UK news Climate crisis Ukraine Environment Science Global development Football Tech Business Obituaries Opinion View all Opinion The Guardian view Columnists Cartoons Opinion videos Letters Sport View all Sport Football Cricket Rugby union Tennis Cycling F1 Golf US sports Culture View all Culture Books Music TV & radio Art & design Film Games Classical Stage Lifestyle View all Lifestyle Fashion Food Recipes Love & sex Health & fitness Home & garden Women Men Family Travel Money Search input google-search Search Support us Print subscriptions Search jobs Holidays Digital Archive Guardian Licensing Live events About Us The Guardian app Video Podcasts Pictures Newsletters Today's paper Inside the Guardian Guardian Weekly Crosswords Wordiply Corrections Tips Search input google-search Search Search jobs Holidays Digital Archive Guardian Licensing Live events About Us World Europe US news Americas Asia Australia Middle East Africa Inequality Global development Christopher Street Day parades are a common sight across Europe, but the rise of the AfD in Germany is stoking fear. Photograph: Julius Mortsi/Zuma Press Wire/Shutterstock View image in fullscreen Christopher Street Day parades are a common sight across Europe, but the rise of the AfD in Germany is stoking fear. Photograph: Julius Mortsi/Zuma Press Wire/Shutterstock Germany This article is more than 1 year old ‘It’s time for us to be louder’: Germany’s Pride parades face up to rise in attacks This article is more than 1 year old Christopher Street Day event organisers urge vigilance amid increase in abuse from rightwing extremists Kate Connolly in Berlin Sat 26 Jul 2025 06.00 CEST Share Prefer the Guardian on Google The organisers of the Christopher Street Day parade in Berlin have urged participants to be vigilant amid a rise in attacks on LGBTQ+ events across Germany . Hundreds of thousands of people are expected to take to the streets of the German capital this weekend for a loud and colourful celebration held in memory of the 1969 Stonewall riots in New York, Christopher Street being the location of the Stonewall Inn. But behind the party atmosphere there is a more sombre mood than usual as LGBTQ+ organisations warn that attacks have become more frequent. “It has been said in recent years that Christopher Street Day had become too big, too commercialised, too apolitical,” said one of the organisers, Thomas Hoffmann. “But now it’s time for us to be louder than ever and for people to come out in large numbers when we’re losing rights for which we have fought for decades.” At stake, he said, was nothing less than societal tolerance across the board, which was being tested “first and foremost on us as we’re most visible”. View image in fullscreen Stairs at the Bundestag underground station in Berlin have been decorated for Christopher Street Day. Photograph: Clemens Bilan/EPA Campaigners say a rise in hostility has accompanied the increase in support for the far-right Alternative für Deutschland (AfD) party, which came second in February’s elections and is now the biggest opposition party in the German parliament. Lorenz Blumenthaler, a spokesperson for the Antonio Amadeu Foundation which campaigns against rightwing extremism, racism and antisemitism, said there had been 55 rightwing extremist attacks at Pride parades across Germany last year. The organisation had already recorded 30 attacks “with a rightwing extremist background” on Christopher Street Day parades in Germany so far this year, he said. There are about 120 parades due to take place this year. “It was last year we noticed that rightwing extremist mobilisation against Pride celebrations was increasing massively,” he said. The attacks on Christopher Street Day celebrations, he said, ranged from “traditional verbal insults to physical assaults, including people being doused with boiling water for walking under buildings as part of the Pride parade”. With the campaign platform Campact, a German NGO, the foundation has established a €100,000 (£87,000) fund to support Christopher Street Day parades, particularly those in eastern Germany. The AfD is high in the polls there and there was an increasingly aggressive opposition to gay rights, Blumenthaler said. Bastian Finke, the head of Maneo , a Berlin project that documents cases of homophobic violence, said the parades had increasingly become targets in the last year. While the events in cities such as Cologne and Berlin had not been specifically threatened, it was those in smaller towns and rural areas that were most at risk and harder to police, he said. skip past newsletter promotion Free newsletter | Weekly Sign up to This is Europe The most pressing stories and debates for Europeans – from identity to economics to the environment Enter your email Sign up after newsletter promotion View image in fullscreen Danjel Zarte, a cafe owner in Berlin’s Neukölln district, has filed 45 police complaints related to homophobic attacks in the last 18 months. Photograph: Kate Connolly/The Guardian Danjel Zarte, who owns the Das Hoven cafe, a popular meeting point for the LGBTQ+ community in the Neukölln district of southern Berlin, said the hatred had become a daily challenge. He has filed 45 police complaints in the last 18 months, all connected to homophobic attacks. On top of the psychological burden, it was also threatening the existence of his cafe as guests were staying away out of fear, he said. “We are constantly verbally abused. People spit at the windows, or throw dog shit at them. A fire extinguisher was thrown through the window of our office, staff have been physically attacked or had the windscreen wipers torn off their cars. I constantly ask myself how long I can continue.” Blumenthaler said analysis of the increased hostility often focused on the influence of Donald Trump in emboldening conservatives and rightwingers globally, but “the fact is homophobia has always been central to [German] rightwing extremist mobilisation”. He added: “It’s not an import; it’s in our midst.” Finke of Maneo said there were almost no Pride celebrations in Germany any more that didn’t trigger some kind of rightwing extremist demonstration, whether by small or large groups. At the same time, he said, the organisation had also seen an increase in Islamist-inspired attacks by “people who, out of a misunderstood interpretation of their religion, feel compelled to punish people for who they are”. This weekend’s parade has adopted the slogan “Never be silent again!” in a clear reminder of the Nazi era when hundreds of thousands of gay people were rounded up. The numbers were particularly high in Berlin, where a nascent gay rights movement in the 1920s was crushed by the Nazis. View image in fullscreen The Pride flag will not fly on the Bundestag this year, but Berlin’s public transport company has decorated the nearby underground station. Photograph: Clemens Bilan/EPA Christopher Street Day organisers say Friedrich Merz’s new government is contributing to the atmosphere of fear by engaging in dog-whistle politics to win voters back from the AfD. Julia Klöckner, the parliamentary president from Merz’s centre-right CDU, drew criticism when she said that, unlike in recent years, the rainbow flag would not be hoisted on the parliament building for the Berlin parade. “We are the German parliament, and we fly one flag: black, red and gold,” she said, alluding to the German flag. “It represents everything our basic law stands for: freedom, human dignity and also the right to sexual self-determination. No flag flies above it.” Merz said he agreed with her decision, stating: “The Bundestag is not a circus tent.” Explore more on these topics Germany LGBTQ+ rights The far right Alternative für Deutschland (AfD) Europe Friedrich Merz Pride news Share Reuse this content More on this story More on this story Ofcom investigates GB News over guest’s pride and paedophilia remarks 10 Aug 2026 Tens of thousands march in London for annual Pride parade 4 Jul 2026 Manchester Pride ‘determining best way forward’ after claims performers have not been paid 16 Oct 2025 Suspended London Pride boss ordered to relinquish control of company bank account 12 Sept 2025 London Pride parade chief investigated over alleged misuse of funds 3 Sept 2025 Uniformed police officers were wrong to march in Pride event, high court rules 16 Jul 2025 LGBTQ+ figures criticise supreme court’s gender ruling at London Pride 5 Jul 2025 Turkish police arrest more than 50 people before banned Istanbul Pride parade 29 Jun 2025 Political parties banned from Pride events after UK gender ruling 13 May 2025 Most viewed Most viewed World Europe US news Americas Asia Australia Middle East Africa Inequality Global development News Opinion Sport Culture Lifestyle Original reporting and incisive analysis, direct from the Guardian every morning Sign up for our email About us Help Complaints & corrections Contact us Tip us off SecureDrop Privacy policy Cookie policy Tax strategy Terms & conditions All topics All writers Newsletters Digital newspaper archive Bluesky Facebook Instagram LinkedIn Threads TikTok YouTube Advertise with us Search UK jobs Tips Accessibility settings Work with us Back to top © 2026 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. (dcr)