Trans Persons in India Fear Rise in Sexual Violence Under Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita with Removal of Legal Safeguards - Frontline Leading the Debate Since 1984 Packages Current Issue The Nation Politics Columns Archives Newsletters Bookmarks Login Account Subscribe Go to Search For a Better Read, Install the Frontline App Login Account Subscribe Go to Search Bookmarks Sections News The Nation Politics Economy Arts & Culture Social Issues Science & Technology Environment Books Health World Affairs Features Travel Letters Data Stories Columns Interviews Photo Essay Packages Video Essentials Newsletter Sign-up Print Subscription Digital Subscription Sitemap RSS feeds Digital Exclusive Stories Webinars eBooks Brandhub Home News Spotlight DIGITAL EXCLUSIVE Trans persons in India fear sexual violence under Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita Replacing the legacy Indian Penal Code also removed legal safeguards to protect the trans community from sexual violence. Published : Sep 06, 2024 17:12 IST - 5 MINS READ Reuters AI Summary COMMents SHARE Copy link Email Facebook Twitter Telegram LinkedIn WhatsApp Reddit READ LATER SEE ALL Remove Naaz Joshi, a 47-year-old trans woman, scrolls through her phone at home in Delhi on August 26. Joshi says she has been sexually harassed many times, approached on her bus home from work by men who have touched her. | Photo Credit: Mehran Firdous/Thomson Reuters Foundation It was supposed to do away with colonial-era homophobia but an overhaul of India’s 160-year-old penal code has instead sparked fears that transgender men and women now run a new risk of rape with impunity. The arcane change to a colonial-era document has filled Dua Fatema Begum with dread since its enactment this summer. “I now feel like I can be raped any time, and there will be nothing I can do about it,” the 29-year-old beautician said. “The absence of strict laws specifically addressing sexual abuse of trans people will give people a free hand to abuse us.” Begum fled her small village in northeast India two years ago, hoping to escape family harassment over her identity. She now fears a whole new set of dangers. This summer, the administration of Prime Minister Narendra Modi replaced a legacy criminal justice system with a new code that removed legal safeguards to protect the trans community from sexual violence. Without these checks, Begum is terrified she is more likely to become the victim of assault in her adopted home city of Delhi. The area had the most rape cases of India’s metropolitan cities in 2022—and Begum feels she is right in the firing line. “I used to return to my rented place late after working at the beauty clinic,” Begum told Context from her home. “Now, I make sure to finish up early and get home before dark, constantly fearing for my safety.” Also Read | New criminal laws expand police powers and restrict civil liberties Modi’s new Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (Indian Justice Code) completely eliminated the old Section 377 (of the Indian Penal Code), which had criminalised same-sex relations. In 2018, the Supreme Court of India found that applying Section 377 to gay sex was unconstitutional . However, the clause remained in the code as a legal protection against sexual violence, with gender inclusive language that included both trans and male victims. The new penal code , which came into effect in July, instead restricts rape cases to a male perpetrator and female victim. Activists say Section 377 was essential for the trans community, who often endure social stigma, discrimination, and abandonment by family. Their exclusion from basic services—be it work, housing, or healthcare—only increases the risk of violence and assault. “India is known as the mother of democracy. There should be equal laws for us too, and we must be treated equally as other citizens,” said Begum. Slow trans progress India has been making slow progress in improving the lives of trans people for more than a decade, recognising the community as a “third gender” in 2014 and enacting the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act in 2019. Under the law, multiple types of abuse against trans people are punishable by up to two years in prison, a significantly shorter time than for the same crime against non-trans women. While there is limited data available on crimes against the trans community, Section 377 has been relied on to protect trans victims of rape, which carries a punishment of up to 10 years. The clause was cited during an investigation into the rape of a trans woman in Bhiwandi, Maharashtra, in January last year, and during the arrest of three suspects in another incident against a trans woman in Maharashtra’s Aurangabad in 2022. Under the revamped penal code, sexual violence against trans people would be categorised as “grievous hurt” instead, a less severe offence that carries a lighter punishment. “Activists say the trans community already faces steep hurdles being taken seriously by the police, who might mock them or refuse to register their complaints.” Naaz Joshi, a 47-year-old trans model from Delhi, says she has been sexually harassed many times, approached on her bus home from work by men who have touched her and proposed sex. “Now that there is no law to address sexual violence of trans people, sexual predators can prey on us at any time,” Joshi said from her home in the capital. “With no legal repercussions to fear, they are emboldened to act with impunity.” Police protection? Activists say the trans community already faces steep hurdles being taken seriously by the police, who might mock them or refuse to register their complaints. In 2020, the National Crime Records Bureau (NCRB) reported that 236 victims of all crimes identified as trans, accounting for 0.006 per cent of the total number of victims. The NCRB recorded no cases of rape involving trans victims. Jeet, co-founder of “Yes, We Exist”, an LGBTQ+ advocacy group, said the loss of Section 377 would further discourage trans victims of crime from coming forward. “Despite the challenges the trans community faces in having their cases registered, Section 377 was a vital legal protection for seeking justice,” Jeet said. “Authorities are now limited to applying less severe charges, such as causing harm or hurt, which fails to address the full seriousness of these offences.” Also Read | ‘The new criminal laws are like old wine in new bottles’: Rebecca John A petition launched online has gathered more than 47,000 signatures urging the Home Ministry to address the gap in protection and advocate for stronger measures against sexual violence. On August 28, the Delhi High Court instructed the government to address the removed safeguards against sexual violence, preferably within six months. The Ministry of Law and Justice did not respond to requests for comment. But Home Minister Amit Shah has said the change to India’s justice system would in fact make the country more equal. “About 77 years after independence, our criminal justice system is becoming completely indigenous and will run on Indian ethos,” Shah told reporters in July. “Instead of punishment, there will now be justice.” Meanwhile Begum, who wants the protections reinstated as quickly as possible, is living on hope—and watching her back. “I am hopeful that if we raise our voices and speak up against the lack of protection for us in the new laws, it will pave the way for necessary reforms,” Begum said. This article first appeared on Context , powered by the Thomson Reuters Foundation. Featured Comment CONTRIBUTE YOUR COMMENTS GET OUR NEWSLETTERS SHARE THIS STORY Copy link Email Facebook Twitter Telegram LinkedIn WhatsApp Reddit Stories that help you connect the dots New criminal laws push India toward a regressive past Legal experts warn of eroded civil liberties as BNS, BNSS, BSA replace longstanding codes, altering FIR procedures and expanding police discretion. V. Venkatesan July 2, 2024 New criminal laws push India toward a regressive past V. Venkatesan July 2, 2024 The invisibilising of queer Dalits in Yashica Dutt’s 2019 memoir Sumit Baudh January 12, 2024 Coloured with hope Pattabi Raman March 23, 2023 End of an unjust law September 12, 2018 Featured Comment THE BIG INFRA PUSH Bigger is not better Jayati Ghosh THE BIG INFRA PUSH Edit note Vasanth Srinivasan + SEE all Stories Key Questions & Insights (AIⓘ) This summary and the FAQs that follow are automatically generated by an AI tool. The output was not vetted by the original writer or copy editor of the article. Do refer to the article for completeness and greater accuracy. Please report if you find any issues with the AI generated content 1 / COMMents SHARE Copy link Email Facebook Twitter Telegram LinkedIn WhatsApp Reddit Featured Authors Anand Teltumbde Soni Mishra Vidyarthy Chatterjee Greeshma Kuthar Frontline About us Magazine Archives Digital Exclusive Stories Current Issue Sitemap Print Subscription Digital Subscription RSS feeds Contact us Customer care Careers Group News Sites The Hindu BL on Campus Sportstar Businessline இந்து தமிழ் திசை The Hindu Centre Young World Club The Hindu ePaper Business Line ePaper TH Games Other Products STEP Images Classifieds - Print Special Publications eBooks Popular Sections News Columns Social Issues Economy Books Arts & Culture Trending on Frontline Who are you? This election is a battle between ‘Tamil Nadu Team’ and ‘Delhi Team’: M.K. Stalin Democracy’s unexpected homecoming Queue republic: How time is stolen from the poor Asha Bhosle’s immortal voice and rebellion Vijay factor might hit AIADMK more than DMK Why Modi’s delimitation exercise makes Stalin see red The CBI’s Freudian slip Ambedkar wouldn’t alter a comma. Will you? The ride home Trending on Group sites Live News Stock Market Today Cricket News FIFA World Cup 2026 Schedule Business News Stock Recommendation Today Silver Rate Today Gold Rate Today Petrol Price Today Diesel Price Today Market Top Gainers Market Top Losers Today Privacy policy Terms of Use Copyright © 2026, THG PUBLISHING PVT LTD. or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. BACK TO TOP Sign in to Unlock member-only benefits! Bookmark stories to read later. Comment on stories to start conversations. Subscribe to our newsletters. Get notified about discounts and offers to our products. ✕ Looks like you are already logged in from more than 5 devices! To continue logging in, remove at least one device from the below list Log out di.payload), 'all')">Log Out from all devices Terms & conditions | Institutional Subscriber ${ ind + 1 } ${ device } Last active - ${ la } Comments Comments have to be in English, and in full sentences. They cannot be abusive or personal. Please abide to our community guidelines for posting your comment We have migrated to a new commenting platform. If you are already a registered user of The Frontline and logged in, you may continue to engage with our articles. If you do not have an account please register and login to post comments.