Nicaragua to decriminalise gay sex | PinkNews About Us Advertise Work with us Login Register Latest News View all UK US World Health Politics Sport Business Culture View all TV Film Celebrity Drag Theatre Music Gaming Lifestyle View all Beauty Careers Fashion Relationships Travel Shopping View all Deals Recommended Fashion & Beauty Tickets Video View all News & Politics Entertainment Lifestyle Discover Trans Awareness Week Drag Race Explainers The Queer Agenda Toggle menu Account Register Login Current Affairs Nicaragua to decriminalise gay sex Nov 16 2007 Written by Joe Roberts Share Save for later Comment Consensual gay sex will no longer be a criminal offence in Nicaragua under a new penal code due to come into effect on March 2008. The surprise news was announced earlier this week by the Nicaraguan National Assembly, reports La Prensa. Under old legislation passed in 1992, “anyone who induces, promotes, propagandises or practices sexual intercourse between persons of the same sex commits the crime of sodomy and shall incur one to three years’ imprisonment.” This article criminalises not only gay men, lesbians and bisexual people in same-sex relationships, but is vague enough to permit the prosecution of individuals for activities such as campaigning for LGBT rights or anyone providing sexual health information or services. Queer News. Straight Up. The LGBTQ+ stories you don’t want to miss, delivered to your inbox daily. Email address required Must be valid email Register By registering you agree to our Privacy Policy Thanks for registering! You can update your email subscriptions at any time in the My profile section of your account. Nicaragua’s new penal code removes all reference to this, reflecting changing social mores in a country which Amnesty International targeted this year for contradicting numerous provisions in international human rights law. The vast majority of countries throughout the Americas have abolished their sodomy laws. José Pallais, president of the Nicaraguan Parliament’s Commission of Justice and Legal Issues, said the changes marked a modernisation, placing legal rights over the state’s moral code. He added: “We are not creating a code of the Catholic Church here, we are creating a democratic code under modern principles and principles of legality.” Dec 31 2024 Every celebrity who came out as LGBTQ+ in 2024 Abortion will remain illegal, however, after insufficient legislative support to change the law. Related articles UK Aug 12 Police Scotland’s trans strip-search policy backed by High Court Africa Jul 08 Senegal amends constitution to ban same-sex marriage after landslide vote Africa Jul 02 Up to 40 arrested in Niger military ‘witch-hunt’ over LGBTQ+ sexual activity Explainers Jun 26 World Cup ‘Pride Match’ Egypt vs Iran – how bad are LGBTQ+ rights in those countries? Africa Mar 12 Senegal parliament doubles gay sex penalty: ‘Homosexuals will no longer breathe in this country’ Latest News Previous Next Celebrity Sep 25 Trans influencer calls out Nikki Glaser for stand-up joke about what’s ‘in her pants’ Culture Sep 25 Trans pro wrestling trailblazer Gisele Shaw signs exclusive NWA contract Bisexual Sep 25 The Traitors star Freddie Fraser’s mum’s emotional response to his coming out Celebrity Sep 25 Lili Reinhart says Hollywood ‘too afraid’ to greenlight lesbian vampire project Celebrity Sep 25 Carly Rae Jepsen describes moment Heated Rivalry inspired her son’s name Celebrity Sep 25 John Green ‘heartbroken’ for trans Harry Potter fans as he talks JK Rowling Current Affairs Sep 25 JD Vance claims James Talarico has a “weird obsession with children in drag” News Sep 25 Susan Sarandon, Hannah Einbinder and Caleb Hearon detained outside UN after protesting Netanyahu What to buy now Previous Next Fashion Mar 27 Connor Ives and MAC team up to re-release the iconic ‘Protect The Dolls’ t-shirt Music Mar 12 The Pussycat Dolls confirm reunion with new single and tour – how to get tickets Music Jan 23 A full guide to the 2026 Harry Styles Together, Together tour including dates and presale info Shopping Nov 24 2025 Ten truly awesome Christmas gifts you can buy to support queer-owned businesses Trans Sep 09 2025 Lush creates ‘luxurious’ trans flag bath bomb to support trans charities Tickets Jun 25 2025 Dolly Parton announces mini Las Vegas residency after wrapping her last tour almost a decade ago Shopping May 15 2025 LEGO celebrates late gay icon Keith Haring with new art set: ‘Want this so bad’ Music Apr 18 2025 Primavera Sound’s most iconic queer performances, from Troye Sivan to Ethel Cain Exclusive Previous Next Exclusive Sep 11 Ania Magliano talks SNL UK season two and anti-LGBTQ voices in comedy: ‘We do edgy in the right way’ Exclusive Sep 11 Elliot Tuttle on Blue Film’s personal inspiration, rejection and taboo: ‘It’s about loneliness’ Exclusive Sep 09 OF star Andy Lee on love for gay fans, ‘poisonous’ creators and ‘harmful’ stunts: ‘Gay men lift me up every day’ Exclusive Sep 07 Real Housewives of London spill the tea: ‘She’d go to the opening of a packet of crisps’ Opinion Sep 04 Katseye in London: A showcase of real talent deserving of the deafening screams Exclusive Sep 02 Adrian Chiarella and Joe Bird on tackling conversion therapy in gay horror Leviticus Exclusive Aug 21 Sziget Festival drag and circus troupe want audiences to feel like family Exclusive Aug 20 Gay wrestler Anthony Bowens says Heated Rivalry shows authentic life of closeted athletes Register to save articles and more. It'll only take a minute and it's free. JOIN US TODAY! Already have an account? Log in here "/> Download the PinkNews app Award winning LGBTQ+ journalism About us Editorial Policy Contact us Advertise Work for us Terms and conditions Privacy policy Privacy manager Privacy Manager