Mozambique | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Mozambique At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? No Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? No Legal Gender Recognition Possible? No LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? No Last Update: March 12, 2026 Mozambique has made significant progress in the recognition of the human rights of LGBTIQ people. Same-sex sexual activity was decriminalized under the new criminal code that took effect in June 2015. In 2017, Mozambique’s courts ruled that LGBTIQ organizations can be legally registered. Discrimination in employment based on sexual orientation has been illegal since 2007 through Article 4 of the Labor Law (Law No. 23/2007), but the law does not explicitly protect trans and intersex people from discrimination. Transgender and gender nonconforming people are particularly vulnerable to discrimination because there is no existing procedure for legal gender recognition in Mozambique. Societal attitudes toward sexual and gender minorities are broadly neutral , but some LGBTIQ people face ostracization from their families, and they face challenges accessing employment and education. During the 2024 electoral campaigning period, the leader of the opposition party PODEMOS pledged to address “the issue of sexual and ethnic minorities.” This marked the first time a presidential candidate explicitly addressed LGBTIQ issues, and it “created high expectations among the LGBTQIA+ community,” according to LGBTIQ group Lambda Mozambique. However, a month later, Lambda Mozambique decried this “promise without any substance,” noting that the electoral manifesto left out any demand for LGBTIQ equality. The Ulayo Fest , an annual queer arts and culture festival, takes place every year during the second week of July, with a public Maputo Pride Week now scheduled for 2026. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International