Edition IN IN US English English हिन्दी मराठी ಕನ್ನಡ தமிழ் বাংলা മലയാളം తెలుగు ગુજરાતી Weather Sign In TOI City kolkata mumbai delhi bengaluru Hyderabad chennai agra agartala ahmedabad ajmer amaravati amritsar bareilly bhubaneswar bhopal chandigarh chhatrapati sambhajinagar coimbatore cuttack dehradun erode faridabad ghaziabad goa gurgaon guwahati hubballi imphal indore itanagar jaipur jammu jamshedpur jodhpur kanpur kochi kohima kolhapur kozhikode ludhiana lucknow madurai mangaluru meerut mumbai region mysuru nagpur nashik navi mumbai noida patna prayagraj puducherry pune raipur rajkot ranchi thane salem shillong shimla srinagar surat trichy thiruvananthapuram udaipur vadodara varanasi vijayawada visakhapatnam photos Web Stories Today's ePaper WB elections photos weather News City News kolkata News 'Gender check': Group of transwomen heading towards RG Kar Medical College groped by RPF constable Trending Rameshwaram Cafe Food Incident Ruchi Gujjar Rajasthan Landslide Mithun Chakraborty Ahmedabad Student Suicide Delhi School Rape Rameshwaram Cafe Food Incident Ruchi Gujjar Rajasthan Landslide Mithun Chakraborty Ahmedabad Student Suicide Delhi School Rape Rameshwaram Cafe Food Incident Ruchi Gujjar Rajasthan Landslide Mithun Chakraborty Ahmedabad Student Suicide Delhi School Rape This story is from August 18, 2024 'Gender check': Group of transwomen heading towards RG Kar Medical College groped by RPF constable Sumati Yengkhom , Ajanta Chakraborty & Dwaipayan Ghosh / TNN / Updated: Aug 18, 2024, 14:11 IST Share AA + Text Size Small Medium Large A group of transwomen heading to RG Kar Medical College filed an FIR alleging an RPF constable groped one of them at Rabindra Sadan metro station, questioning her gender. The constable reportedly made inappropriate remarks and the incident drew prompt social media attention. Metro Railway and RPF denied the allegations, counter-filing an FIR against the group. KOLKATA: A group of transwomen who were heading to RG Kar Medical College on Friday to join the protest have filed an FIR alleging that one of them was groped by an RPF constable to check her ‘gender' at Rabindra Sadan metro station. A video grab of the incident shows the transwoman in tears while the alleged accused is seen trying to avoid the camera. Her companions went live on social media. Other footage released by activists who are fighting the case show the station manager intervening and cops coming in but the accused RPF personnel is nowhere to be seen. The group also produced a copy of a written apology on a blank paper that carries a ‘Kolkata Metro' stamp. You Can Also Check: Kolkata AQI | Weather in Kolkata | Bank Holidays in Kolkata | Public Holidays in Kolkata RPF and Metro Railway have denied the allegations and filed a counter FIR against the transwomen, accusing them of raising slogans and attempting to disturb peace. The alleged incident happened on Friday evening when three transwomen reached Rabindra Sadan metro station after participating in a protest by the community near Academy of Fine Arts and bought tickets till Shyambazar. While two of them were allowed entry to the platform, the third, a 27-year-old Kasba resident, was allegedly stopped by an RPF constable. "I told the security personnel that I was not a terrorist and he could check my bag. Out of the blue the constable touched my breast to check my gender and made a lewd remark that he was checking if it was real or fake. I am shocked and humiliated," the 27-year-old said. A heated exchange followed, with one of her companions pushing back the constable. "CCTV footage was seen again and again by our officials and it clearly revealed that the RPF personnel wasn't at fault. None of these protestors were stopped or touched by any RPF personnel as has been alleged," a Metro Railway spokesperson said. "When we started protesting, another male security person came and pressed my hand and pulled me saying, ‘aap thoda shant hain, thora andar room mein chalke baaten karte hain (you are a quiet person, let us go to a room and talk)'. Will any male cop do that to a biological female?" said a 29-year-old transwoman, who is a make-up artist by profession. A commotion followed with around 20 transwomen and rights activists rushing to the spot on hearing the news. "The RPF is supposed to ensure safety of commuters. But in this case they turned perpetrators. Can't we be part of society and show solidarity with the RG Kar rape-murder victim," said another transwoman, a 25-year-old who was at the spot with her mother. A case under Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights, 2019), was registered at Bhowanipore Police Station. "We are collecting CCTV footage and footage from the group. We will conduct a preliminary probe and send a legal notice to the accused RPF personnel to join the probe. Their statements will be verified and the next course of action decided," said an investigating officer. "RPF is a central agency and it is shameful that its personnel are not even sensitised about transgender rights," said transgender activist and former member of West Bengal Transgender Development Board, Ranjita Sinha who had to rushed to help her colleagues out. According to Metro Railway, 10-15 transgender commuters entered Rabindra Sadan station around 6.20 pm on Thrusday and started shouting "We Want Justice" slogans. An RPF lady constable and other RPF personnel requested them not to do so as it was disturbing other passengers but they refused to pay heed and began arguing with them. They also blocked the north side station gates that hindered passengers' movement. Some commuters were also assaulted. A sub-inspector and other RPF personnel reached the spot from Kalighat post and tried to pacify the commuters. When they failed, Bhowanipore police station was informed. Cops arrived and tried to bring the situation under control but the chaos persisted for hours. In order to solve the problem, RPF personnel also apologised to them. Ultimately they left the station premises at 11.20 pm," a Metro Railway spokesperson said. End of Article Follow Us On Social Media Visual Stories Previous Tejasswi Prakash-Inspired Top 10 glamorous looks tv Parvathy Thiruvothu's stunning snaps Entertainment Sreeleela charms in her traditional attire Entertainment South actresses' best pictures of the week Entertainment 8 fun ways to keep your children off screens Lifestyle Ashi Singh’s cheerful and colourful looks tv In pics: Adorable looks of Ritu Varma Entertainment Are you a couch potato? 8 moves you can do while watching TV Lifestyle Sreemukhi’s top 10 traditional looks tv Urmil by Ritika & Prerna unveils ‘The Silent Fold’ collection ahead of the festive run Lifestyle Next 1 2 3 Photostories Hrithik Roshan to Ahaan Panday and Aneet Padda: Best celebrity debut hits in Bollywood 6 Japanese techniques to overcome laziness 6 reasons to have Pomegranate or Anar 3 times a week Rahul Roy classics that defined an era of Bollywood love stories Why do Indians break a coconut before starting new ventures? 8 types of elephants found around the world and what makes them unique How to raise screen-free kids in a digital world From Ladakh to Kutch: 5 Stargazing Spots in India That Are Pure Magic! Planning a short trip during the Independence Day weekend: 5 destinations to avoid strictly 4 nut-filled breakfast ideas to stay full and lose weight naturally 1 2 3 Hot Picks Parliament Monsoon Session Soumya Murder Case Govindachamy Missile ULPGM-V3 TCS new benching policy Rajasthan building collapse Russian Plane Missing Top Trending Hulk Hogan Wife Jonathan Kuminga Josh Hines Allen Travis Kelce Hailee Steinfeld Donald Trump Indian Origin Sanjai Syamaprasad Dwyane Wade Shannon Sharpe Dwyane Wades Wife Tired of too many ads? go ad free now Trending Stories In City Entire Website Rajasthan shocker: Final-year BDS student found dead in hostel, blames 2 staffers for harassment in suicide note Delhi horror: 14-year-old boy sexually assaulted, filmed, stabbed 24 times; 9 held 'Missed important meeting': Air India Delhi-Pune flyers spend two hours in plane after taxiing; crew cites 'technical problem' Maharashtra horror: 16-year-old HIV+ girl raped for 2 years by care-home staffer; forced to abort Delhi shocker: Teen stabbed for refusing to help friend increase Instagram followers; 2 held Punjab horror: Minor girl kidnapped & gangraped in moving car; cops check CCTVs to detect car Car thief dupes sellers on OLX with test drive trick; arrested in Rajasthan's Karauli after 150km chase, WagonR recovered Affair, forced poisoning and a black car: How missing bottle cap and chappal cracked staged suicide in Bengaluru; wife, her lover arrested for husband's murder 'Bundled into a car, taken to Kharagpur': Kolkata director Srikanta abducted during music video shoot; rescued ‘Can’t speak English’: ADM answers Uttarakhand HC CJ’s question in Hindi, draw flak; court seeks govt response on suitability for executive role Indian Army Agniveer CEE 2025 result declared at joinindianarmy.nic.in, download here Ciara and baby Amora twin in new adorable photo as fans gush over Russell Wilson's lookalike daughter Chess WC Final Live: Divya, Humpy share honours in Game 1 draw Shannon Sharpe’s $50M settlement twists as ex-girlfriend steps in Asia Cup 2025 schedule: Complete fixtures, India vs Pakistan date out IND vs ENG Live: Shubman Gill, KL Rahul power India to 174/2 at stumps Jeff Bezos sells $1.5 billion worth of Amazon shares, now holds stock valued at… Toddler bites cobra to death, lives to tell tale IND vs ENG Test | 'If you can’t play the short ball, go play tennis or golf': Sunil Gavaskar questions ICC’s concussion substitute rule Watch the Earth split in real time: First-ever video reveals 2.5-meter fault slip in seconds caused by an earthquake Tired of too many ads? go ad free now Explore Every Corner Across The Globe Indian Army Agniveer CEE Result Dwyane Wade Josh Allen Shannon Sharpe NBA Trade Rumors Los Angeles Lakers Stephen Curry Who is Hulk Hogan Wife Vanessa Bryant Gisele Bndchen Hulk Hogan Mumbai-Pune Expressway Mahua Moitra Air India Kiren Rijiju Tamil Nadu Election Operation Sindoor Bihar Election American Airlines Saurabh Anand UK Citizenship Test Cambodia-Thailand War Qatar Residency UAE Iceberg Project India-UK Trade Russia Oil 8th Pay Commission Dubai Visa Coldplay Scandal David Lee About us Create Your Own Ad Terms of Use and Grievance Redressal Policy Privacy policy Advertise with us RSS Newsletter Feedback ePaper Sitemap Archives Living and Entertainment Cricbuzz Lifestyle Newspaper Subscription Food News TV Times Prime Travel Destinations Whats Hot ETimes Times Life Times Pets MyLifeXP Services CouponDunia TechGig TimesJobs Bollywood News Times Mobile Gadgets Times Events Work with Us Colombia Hot on the Web Pancreatic Cancer Chest Pain Peanut Butter Benefits Tiny Deer Brain Exercises Heart Attack Parent's Day Wishes Saiyaara Heart Problem Saiyaara Box Office Collection Kishore Kumar Liver Health High Cholesterol Hari Hara Veera Mallu Movie Review Heart Problem Maareesan Movie Review Hair Loss Thalaivan Thalaivii Movie Review Gut Health Walking Medications Hari Hara Veera Mallu Box Office Collection Parrot Skin Problem Archana Puran Singh Maharashtra Glass Skywalk Saiyaara Movie Review Baby Names Walking For Weight Loss Bad Cholesterol Fatty Liver Hair Loss Solar Eclipse Anand Mahindra Fatty Liver Heart Problem One Piece Best Shounen Anime Neck Pain Tips Monsoon Travel Tips Chronic Inflammation Jeff Bezos Trending Topics Hulk Hogan NBA Trade Los Angeles Lakers LeBron James NBA Trade Rumors Brandon Aiyuks Wife Travis Kelce Tom Brady India vs England Scorecard Patrick Mahomes Sidney Crosby Hockey Canada Assault Case NHL Trade Rumors Tips to Speak English H1B Visa NEET UG Counselling RRB Technician Recruitment Sunil Gavaskar Divya Deshmukh Pakistan DGMO Delhi School Assault Youtuber Mohammad Amir Ruchi Gujjar Bihar Cobra Bite Dehradun Religious Conversion Rameshwaram Cafe News Govindachamy Kolkata Hospital OT Hours Karnataka Bhawan Row Mithun Chakraborty Travis Kelce Nyt Connections Hints Wordle Today Kashish Mittal Hariyali Teej Elon Musk Bill Gates Mansion GTA San Andreas Cheat Codes Jensen Huang Sundar Pichai Blackrock JD Vance Popular Categories Headlines Sports News Business News India News World News Bollywood News Health+ Tips Indian TV Shows Technology Travel Etimes Health & Fitness NFL August Long Weekend 2025 India vs England Astrology Weather Today Platinum Rate Today Silver Rate Today Gold Rate Today Is Bank open today Is Bank Open Tomorrow June Bank Holidays Public Holidays in June Stock Market Holidays Financial Calculators Technology News International Sports Public Holidays Bank Holidays Latest News Embarrassing: Trump's Singapore nominee fumbles basic questions - who is Dr Anjani Sinha? India-Pakistan clash on September 14 to headline Asia Cup 2025 IND vs ENG 4th Test: 'Beyond this pair, I wouldn't be too hopeful' – Manjrekar hails Gill-Rahul resolve, outlines Day 5 challenge Bigg Boss Malayalam 7 to launch with ‘Heaven and Hell’ theme? Here’s what we know about the concept 'Return to the land': Group sets up all-white town in Arkansas; civil rights activists raise alarm Vijay Deverakonda silences doubters in style; Rayalaseema dialect wins hearts - WATCH Weekly Chinese Horoscope (July 28 – August 03): Keep your mind calm and schedule steady Thailand-Cambodia conflict: Avoid these 7 provinces in Thailand as per travel advisory Landlines to AI: How Mumbai's disaster management department transformed after 26/7 Monsta X’s Shownu stuns at WATERBOMB 2025; goes viral for his ripped physique - Pics Loyalty is important, says Kapil Dev Takopi’s Original Sin episode 5 review & recap: Tragedy deepens, emotions escalate Rebecca Romijn says "wasn't sure" if she completed shoot for 'Avengers: Doomsday' - 'The script hasn't ...' ‘Boys II Planet’; Jaejoong’s comment about trainees goes viral - netizens criticise the show for being ‘insensitive’ BOYNEXTDOOR faces backlash over “meet & greet” that lacked both meeting and greeting Why UAE is a top choice for digital nomads: Remote work visas, fast internet, and premium urban life Megablock on Mumbai suburban railway; no blocks on Western suburban 'I said, wait a minute?' - Billy Joel on his rift with Elton John over 'hurtful' rehab remark - Read more Copyright © 2025 Bennett, Coleman & Co. Ltd. All rights reserved. For reprint rights: Times Syndication Service Follow Us On