Denmark | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Denmark At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Legal Gender Recognition Possible? Yes LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? Yes Last Update: March 12, 2026 Legal protections for LGBTIQ people in Denmark are robust. Same-sex couples may marry and adopt, and the government announced its plan to “strengthen the opportunities for LGBT+ families with three or four parents” in August 2024. Discrimination based on sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, and sex characteristics is prohibited. Transgender people may self-determine their legal gender markers , and nonbinary people may choose to use the gender marker “X” on their passports. In July 2024, Denmark eliminated discrimination in blood donation and now asks all donors about sexual practices regardless of their gender identity or sexual orientation. Denmark has a highly comprehensive sex education system that includes information on LGBTIQ issues. Public opinion is also very supportive—according to the 2023 Eurobarometer public opinion survey of Danish people, 93 percent agreed that there was nothing wrong with same-sex relationships, and 93 percent believe marriage equality should be the norm across Europe. However, gaps in equal protection remain. In 2023, 18 percent of LGBTIQ respondents reported experiencing discrimination in health care settings. Gaps in gender-affirming health care, including long waiting queues, lead some trans people to self-medicate. Anti-trans rhetoric is becoming increasingly prevalent. In August 2024, the then-minister of gender equality claimed that legal gender recognition for trans and intersex people is “problematic” and could “overshadow the equality problems that actually exist,” asserting that only two biological sexes should be recognized. In 2024, the Supreme Court upheld the placement of a trans woman in a men’s prison, as well as strip searches and the taking of urine samples in the presence of male staff. Medically unnecessary interventions on intersex children remain legal. In what has been described as Denmark’s first legal case involving misgendering , in 2025, a psychotherapist in Denmark was taken to court over a blog post that featured sexually suggestive images of a trans woman with male pronouns used to refer to her. The court dismissed the misgendering claims and acquitted the defendant on criminal charges, but awarded compensation to the plaintiff based on a combination of photos, videos, and content in the blog post. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International