Colombia Allows Transgender Community To Change Sex On IDs Without Physical Exams | IBTimes INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS TIMES NEWSLETTER SIGNUP My account Log Out Sep 27, 12:38 PM EDT U.S. World Politics Economy & Markets Business Crypto Technology Opinion Deals & Reviews NEWSLETTER My account Log Out US Edition U.S. World Politics Economy & Markets Business Crypto Technology Opinion Deals & Reviews Listings & More Spotlight Glossary SMB Forum CEO Spotlight Editions Australia Edition Korea Edition Japan Edition India Edition Singapore Edition United Kingdom United States NEWSLETTER Follow Us Editions Australia Edition Korea Edition Japan Edition India Edition Singapore Edition United Kingdom United States World Colombia Allows Transgender Community To Change Sex On IDs Without Physical Exams By Brianna Lee @briannaclee Published 06/08/15 AT 4:52 PM EDT Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on LinkedIn Share on Reddit Share on Flipboard Share on Pocket A new law in Colombia allows transgender people to change their names and sex on identification cards without undergoing intrusive physical and mental examinations. Pictured is a man holding a rainbow flag during a protest demanding rights for the LGBT community outside the Congress building in Bogota, Nov. 27, 2012. Reuters/John Vizcaino Members of Colombia’s transgender community now will have an easier time changing their names and sex on identification cards under a new law. Colombians will be able to change their sex on identification forms without having to prove their sexual identity through psychiatric or physical evaluations. Colombia’s ministers of justice and interior will present the decree Tuesday, the news agency Efe reported. Justice Minister Yesid Reyes told Colombian newspaper El Espectador he approved the rule change Friday to allow people to change their sex on government-issued ID cards by signing a document before a notary, bypassing the “cumbersome” way those changes currently are approved. “Judges used to order bodily inspections to determine if people had physically changed their sex, or demanded a psychiatric exam to know if the applicant had gender dysphoria,” Reyes said, referring to the technical term used for those whose gender identity deviates from their sexual anatomy. “Both exams were profoundly invasive of privacy rights and were rooted in unacceptable prejudice. The construction of sexual and gender identity is an issue that doesn’t depend on biology.” The move comes just weeks after a state court in the city of Ibague ruled the required physical examinations were not unreasonable or disproportionate since they were voluntary. “It is a matter of self-determination for the interested party to decide whether to bear the burden of bodily examination or face the legal consequences of not doing the test,” the court said in a statement, according to Colombia’s El Nuevo Dia newspaper . Colombia’s Constitutional Court ruled last month transgender women were exempt from compulsory military service , but recommended the defense ministry develop specific protocols for transgender men and women who want to join the military to avoid gender discrimination in military recruitment. Last month, Interior Minister Juan Fernando Cristo also remarked the government’s ruling party supported rights for the LGBT community in Colombia, including same-sex marriage and adoption rights. Regarding the new identification procedures, he said the change was an “ important advance for the recognition of the LGBT community in Colombia.” Nevertheless, Colombia’s transgender community remains vulnerable to discrimination and violence. Nearly 70 transgender people have been slain in Colombia in the last eight years, according to Todd Howland, the U.N. human rights representative in Colombia. “These forms of violence show the country still needs to intensify the building of a culture of absolute respect for human rights, in which all lives are important and everyone can live free of any type of violence, be it physical, verbal or psychological,” Howland said in a statement last month. RELATED STORIES Transgender Employees Bathroom Access Guidance Issued By OSHA Amid LGBT Pride Month, Caitlyn Jenner's Vanity Fair Cover Story Turkey’s Transgender People Fight For Recognition, Run For National Election For First Time © Copyright IBTimes 2026. All rights reserved. Request a Correction Editorial Guidelines IBT Fast Start - Let the best of International News come to you Sign up and stay up to date with our daily newsletter. You can unsubscribe at any time. By signing up you are agreeing to our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy . Join the Discussion MOST POPULAR IN World 8 Navy Members Attempted Suicide During USS Lincoln's Lengthy Deployment: Report F-35 Parts Were Reportedly Diverted To Hong Kong. China Might Now Have Them. Brent Oil Could Skyrocket Past $150 If Wars Continue. Bank of America Warns Supply Crunch Could Last Into 2027. The U.S. And Iran Are Reportedly Discussing a Deal To Reopen The Hormuz Strait. Oil Is Climbing Anyway. The U.S. Is Reportedly Looking At Increased Military Support In The Region Over Potential Action Related To Cuba Trump Faces Pushback Over Diesel Export Ban: Business Leaders Warn of Higher Costs for Farmers and Truckers China Is Reportedly Assisting Iran In The War With The U.S.; Satellite Intelligence Is Helping Tehran Strike Targets CIA Warned European Allies That Russia Could Target Them With Drone Attacks: Report NATO-Russia Tensions Keep Escalating. Danish Intelligence Now Warned Moscow Could Attack In The Coming Months. China Has Been Sending Components For Drones And Missiles To Iran During The War With The U.S.: Report U.S. Orders For Chinese Goods Jumped Ahead Of Trump-Xi Summit. The Rebound Caught Researchers By Surprise. Trump Reportedly Told Venezuela's Leaders Elections Need To Happen. She Said Yes, But Not When. Major Incident Declared At UK Military Base That Doubles As An FOB For U.S. Forces. Zelenskyy Called On Trump To Allow Ukraine To Produce Patriot Missiles. He Says He's Got The Approval. U.S. To Help Musk Fight EU $137 Million Fine Over X's Violation Of Digital Services Act Pope Leo Issues Stark AI Warning in Paris: Humanity Must Avoid a 'Paradise of Machines' South African Ambassador To U.S. Denies Trump Administration's Claims Of White Genocide, Calls It 'Something That Just Doesn't Exist'. Bill Gates Says AI Companies Can't Police Themselves, Calls for Washington to Mandate Safeguards Trump Rejects Deal To Reopen Strait Of Hormuz. Iran Says It Will Wait For Confirmation. China's VP Urged Nations To Embrace Multilateralism In UN Address. His Speech Was Full Of Thinly-Veiled Criticisms Of The U.S. Latest in World 1 Trump Rejects Deal To Reopen Strait Of Hormuz. Iran Says It Will Wait For Confirmation. 2 Major Incident Declared At UK Military Base That Doubles As An FOB For U.S. Forces. 3 Russia's Foreign Minister Promises UN That Russia Will Fight On As Ukraine Continues Attacks On Russian Oil Refineries. 4 South African Ambassador To U.S. Denies Trump Administration's Claims Of White Genocide, Calls It 'Something That Just Doesn't Exist'. 5 China's VP Urged Nations To Embrace Multilateralism In UN Address. His Speech Was Full Of Thinly-Veiled Criticisms Of The U.S. Promoted in World 1 Why Expanding Globally Often Hurts Profits—and How One Expert Changed the Game 2 Libya's Food Security Is Becoming a Global Trade Question 3 From One School Visit to a Global Run for Education 4 Chris Hsu on How One Programming Language Rewrote Mathematics and Why Software Is Next 5 After the Storm That Erased It, One Caribbean Island Chose to Rebuild Bigger MOST POPULAR IN World 1 8 Navy Members Attempted Suicide During USS Lincoln's Lengthy Deployment: Report 2 F-35 Parts Were Reportedly Diverted To Hong Kong. China Might Now Have Them. 3 Brent Oil Could Skyrocket Past $150 If Wars Continue. Bank of America Warns Supply Crunch Could Last Into 2027. 4 The U.S. And Iran Are Reportedly Discussing a Deal To Reopen The Hormuz Strait. Oil Is Climbing Anyway. 5 The U.S. Is Reportedly Looking At Increased Military Support In The Region Over Potential Action Related To Cuba Get up to Speed with IBT’s Fast Start Stay up to date with our daily newsletter Sign Up Now IBT VIDEO NEWS World U.S. Economy & Markets Business Technology Politics Crypto Opinion Featured Visionary Voices Social Capital SMB Forum Spotlight Press Release CEO Spotlight Deals & Reviews ABOUT About us Contact us Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Cookie Policy Advertise with us Editions Australia India Singapore United Kingdom United States FOLLOW US Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Flipboard Instagram Newsletter © Copyright 2026 IBT Media Inc. All Rights Reserved.