Transgender Bill: India parliament passes amendment to redefine transgender identity amid protests Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Home News US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business World of Business Technology of Business NYSE Opening Bell Technology Artificial Intelligence Intelligence Revolution AI v the Mind Tech Now Health Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList To the Ends of the Earth Earth Science Natural Wonders Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcast Categories Radio Audio FAQs Video BBC Maestro Discover the World Live Live News Live Sport Site search Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters New India bill to amend transgender rights sparks protests 26 March 2026 Share Save Add as preferred on Google Nikita Yadav & Abhishek Dey AFP via Getty Images The amendment has sparked protests in the country India's parliament has passed a controversial bill that seeks to change how transgender people are legally recognised and their right to self-identify, amid protests by opposition parties and the LGBTQ community. The government says the changes will make welfare benefits more accessible and strengthen an existing law against exploitation and trafficking, but critics warn it could exclude many transgender, non-binary and gender-fluid people. India is estimated to have around two million transgender people, though activists say the true number is higher and legal recognition remains uneven. The legislation was approved by both houses this week and now needs the president's assent to become law. In 2014, India's Supreme Court recognised transgender people as a "third gender" and affirmed their right to self-identify. Despite legal protections, many transgender people in India continue to face discrimination and limited access to education, healthcare and formal employment, often relying on traditional or informal forms of work. In 2019, the Transgender Persons (Protection of Rights) Act was enacted, aimed at addressing vulnerabilities faced by the community. Now, the new bill - essentially a proposed amendment to the 2019 law - centres on how a transgender person is defined. The government says the current definition is too vague and makes it difficult to identify those who are most marginalised. It argues that a narrower definition will help ensure welfare benefits - such as job reservations and healthcare support - reach those who need them. It says the changes are intended to protect people facing "extreme and oppressive" discrimination and to prevent exploitation and trafficking. The bill removes the right to self-identify and instead limits recognition to those defined by biological or physical traits. This includes people with intersex variations - where a person is born with sex characteristics that do not fit typical definitions of male or female - as well as traditional identities long used among transgender communities in India. The bill also makes certification from medical boards and district authorities mandatory for those undergoing gender-affirming surgeries. AFP via Getty Images Members of the transgender community have held multiple rallies and protests over the past week against the bill Activists say the new bill moves away from the self-identification principle of the 2014 court ruling and could reshape how transgender people are legally recognised. Critics further argue that the new definition could exclude many transgender people, particularly those who rely on self-identification, including some trans men and women as well as non-binary and gender-fluid people. They also say that mandatory medical certification undermines dignity and autonomy. "It has shattered our identity," transgender rights activist Laxmi Narayan Tripathi told reporters. Activist Grace Banu told a press conference in Delhi that the community was seeking "recognition without invasion" and "rights without humiliation". "This is not protection, but violation," Banu said. The removal of "the factor of self-determination" in the bill is an "attack on the privacy and dignity of the individual", lawyer N Kavitha Rameshwar wrote in The Times of India newspaper. A Supreme Court-appointed advisory panel has asked the government to withdraw the bill, saying the removal of self-identification goes against the 2014 ruling of the top court. The panel also called for wider consultation, warning the changes could be a setback to efforts to protect transgender rights. Over the past two weeks, members of the LGBTQ community have held protests across India against the proposed changes. Opposition politicians have also criticised the bill and called it "draconian". Congress party leader Rahul Gandhi called it a "brazen attack" on transgender rights, while Supriya Sule of the Nationalist Congress Party (Sharadchandra Pawar) questioned why it was introduced in what she called a "hasty manner". Follow BBC News India on Instagram , YouTube, X and Facebook . Asia Gender recognition reform in Scotland Delhi India LGBT Transgender people Related The young women guiding tourists through India's night sky Young people in China are fangirling over a professor who gets their anxiety Watch: Bangkok declared flood disaster zone More from the BBC 5 hrs ago West Indies in India 2026 Fixtures for West Indies' limited-overs tour of India, featuring three ODIs and five Twenty20 internationals. 5 hrs ago 9 hrs ago Theft of church Pride banner reported as hate crime The vicar of St Mark's Church in Sheffield says it is not the first time such items have been taken. 9 hrs ago 15 hrs ago The tiger that stunned a seaside town Plassey the tiger arrived in Kent with the Royal Madras Fusiliers and was kept as a regimental pet. 15 hrs ago 1 day ago Rainbow flag wrapped around castle for Pride event Totnes Castle is wrapped in a rainbow flag as part of the Devon town's Pride celebrations. 1 day ago 1 day ago Senedd presiding officer accuses Reform MS of offensive comments in Welsh Gender Service debate Joe Martin called for "butcher" doctors who performed surgery on children to be jailed. 1 day ago British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages The BBC is in multiple languages Read the BBC In your own language BBC News Brasil BBC News Mundo (Spanish) BBC News မြန်မာ (Burmese) BBC News 中文 (Chinese) BBC News Indonesia BBC News 코리아 (Korean) BBC News ไทย (Thai) BBC News Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese) BBC News Azərbaycanca (Azeri) BBC News Magyarul (Hungarian) BBC News Кыргыз Кызматы (Kyrgyz) BBC News Polska (Polish) BBC News România (Romanian) BBC News Русская служба (Russian) BBC News na srpskom (Serbian) BBC News Україна (Ukrainian) BBC News O'zbek (Uzbek) BBC News عربي (Arabic) BBC News فارسی (Persian) BBC News Türkçe (Turkish) BBC News বাংলা (Bengali) BBC News دری (Dari) BBC News ગુજરાતી (Gujarati) BBC News हिन्दी (Hindi) BBC News मराठी (Marathi) BBC News नेपाली (Nepali) BBC News සිංහල (Sinhala) BBC News ਪੰਜਾਬੀ (Punjabi) BBC News Afaan Oromoo BBC News አማርኛ (Amharic) BBC News Afrique (French) BBC News Hausa BBC News Gaelic NAIDHEACHDAN BBC News Ìgbò BBC News Japanese 日本語 BBC News Gahuza BBC News Pidgin BBC News Somali BBC News Swahili BBC News தமிழ் (Tamil) BBC News తెలుగు (Telugu) BBC News ትግርኛ (Tigrinya) BBC News اردو (Urdu) BBC News Yorùbá BBC News World Service Follow BBC on: Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Do not share or sell my info Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us BBC.com Help & FAQs Content Index Set Preferred Source Copyright 2026 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.