Thailand | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Thailand At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? No Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? No Legal Gender Recognition Possible? No LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? No Last Update: March 12, 2026 In 2024, Thailand became the first country in Southeast Asia to legalize same-sex marriage. The bill passed its final reading in the Senate in June 2024 and came into effect on January 22, 2025, a day celebrated in Thailand with mass weddings capping over two decades of activism for marriage equality. The bill uses gender-neutral terms such as “marriage partners” and “individuals” instead of women, men, husbands, and wives. It guarantees same-sex couples the right to adopt and secures their inheritance rights, including other benefits such as tax benefits, health care decision-making, and spousal rights. Thailand’s Gender Equality Act (2015) prohibits discrimination against persons “of a different appearance from his/her own sex by birth” or a “sexual expression different from that person’s original sex” in multiple domains such as housing and employment. However, it has been criticized for wording that allows exemptions for religious or security reasons, leaving some gaps in protections. Having never been colonized, Thailand does not have anti-sodomy laws as colonial remnants. LGBTIQ people enjoy relatively freer lives in Thailand than in neighboring countries . Traditional gender diversity is widely accepted in the form of kathoeys, largely understood at present as transfeminine individuals. However, despite having a positive reputation internationally for LGBTIQ people’s rights and being a destination for gender-affirming health care , activists have repeatedly noted that this perception is exploited by the tourism industry . In reality, there are significant limits to tolerance for queer and trans persons , accompanied by harmful stereotypes. Trans people do not enjoy full protection from discrimination. Binary gendered uniforms are strongly enforced across educational institutions . Invasive questioning and violation of privacy are routine in health care settings . Thai Medical Council regulations describe a transgender person as “a person with behavior indicating confusion.” While a transgender person is eligible to apply for a name change, the discretion rests with government officials . The Thai national citizen ID issued to all citizens uses binary gender prefixes based on gender assigned at birth . There is no legal process that allows people to change their official gender markers. However, four different versions of gender recognition bills based on self-determination have been floated and are pending discussion in Parliament, including one drafted by the Ministry of Social Development and Human Security, and others advanced by the People’s Party, an intersex organization, and another civil society organization. Speaking at an event in May 2024 before Pride Month, Paetongtarn Shinawatra, then-leader of the Pheu Thai Party and former prime minister, promised a push for legal gender recognition before 2030. Intersexphobia remains a problem , and children are subjected to nonconsensual medical interventions. At least one of the draft gender recognition laws, filed by activists in 2024 and on file with Outright, would address harmful intersex genital surgeries and discrimination, and pave the way toward intersex legal gender recognition. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International