Foreign Office's new travel warning to LGBTQ+ holidaymakers About Us Advertise Work with us Login Register Latest News View all UK US World Health Politics Sport Business Culture View all TV Film Celebrity Drag Theatre Music Gaming Lifestyle View all Beauty Careers Fashion Relationships Travel Shopping View all Deals Recommended Fashion & Beauty Tickets Video View all News & Politics Entertainment Lifestyle Discover Trans Awareness Week Drag Race Explainers The Queer Agenda Toggle menu Account Register Login Travel The Foreign Office issues new travel warning to LGBTQ+ holidaymakers visiting Greece Apr 16 2024 Written by Gabriella Ferlita Share Save for later Comment Listen The Foreign Travel Office has issued a new warning. (Getty) You might be starting to organise your hot girl summer plans, but the Foreign Office has issued a new travel warning to LGBTQ+ holidaymakers visiting Greece. Queer News. Straight Up. The LGBTQ+ stories you don’t want to miss, delivered to your inbox daily. Email address required Must be valid email Register By registering you agree to our Privacy Policy Thanks for registering! You can update your email subscriptions at any time in the My profile section of your account. Despite Greece recently legalising same-sex marriage and adoption – becoming the first country with a Christian Orthodox majority to do so – the Foreign Office has suggested that those in the LGBTQ+ community should still remain alert. In an update to its Foreign travel advice website , the passage for travellers to Greece reads: “Same-sex sexual relations are legal in Greece and civil unions between same-sex couples have been legal since 2015 and same sex marriage was legalised in February 2024. The age of consent in Greece is 15, this applies to partners of both the same sex and opposite sex. Transgender people are able to change their legal gender. Anti-discrimination and hate speech laws apply to gender identity. “Public attitudes towards same-sex sexual activity vary throughout the country; showing affection in public by same-sex couples may be frowned upon, especially in rural areas. “Attitudes are generally much more welcoming in Athens and on many Greek islands, particularly on Lesvos, Mykonos and Skiathos. See our information and advice page for the LGBT+ community before you travel.” Nov 29 2023 56 celebrities you didn’t know are gay, bisexual or lesbian After a gay couple made history with the first same-sex wedding in Greece in March, two 21-year-old trans people were allegedly chased and attacked by a mob of people abusing them with homophobic slurs and throwing bottles at them. In response, a huge crowd of LGBTQ+ folks and allies took a stand against transphobia on the streets of Thessaloniki, northern Greece on 10 March. The thousands-strong crowd gathered in Aristotelous Square – the location of the attack – before marching through the streets of the city chanting, waving Pride flags and carrying banners denouncing fascism, homophobia and transphobia. The demonstration saw LGBTQ+ folks, women’s groups, anti-fascist coalitions and student organisers come together to stand in solidarity against hate. In terms of the safest LGBTQ+-friendly countries to visit, Sweden came out on top in a 2020 ranking . Ticking all the boxes on same-sex marriage, discrimination and worker protections, adoption recognition, criminalisation of violence and a strong Gallup poll rating, Sweden earned a great safety score of 322. Behind it were Canada, Norway, Portugal, Belgium and the UK, all of which are known for being incredibly welcoming to LGBTQ+ travellers. Though, sunshine is never guaranteed with the latter destination. More: Greece LGBT Please login or register to comment on this story. Related articles Politics Jul 21 New Health Secretary Yvette Cooper’s stance on LGBTQ+ issues Politics Jul 20 Andy Burnham’s record on LGBTQ+ issues as he becomes new Prime Minister Politics Jul 10 Ann Widdecombe’s track record on LGBTQ+ issues as she dies at 78 Sport Jan 27 LGBTQ+ football fans given travel warning for 2026 World Cup over safety concerns Travel Aug 12 2025 Is it illegal to be gay in Turkey and is it safe to travel there? Latest News Previous Next Celebrity Sep 25 Trans influencer calls out Nikki Glaser for stand-up joke about what’s ‘in her pants’ Culture Sep 25 Trans pro wrestling trailblazer Gisele Shaw signs exclusive NWA contract Bisexual Sep 25 The Traitors star Freddie Fraser’s mum’s emotional response to his coming out Celebrity Sep 25 Lili Reinhart says Hollywood ‘too afraid’ to greenlight lesbian vampire project Celebrity Sep 25 Carly Rae Jepsen describes moment Heated Rivalry inspired her son’s name Celebrity Sep 25 John Green ‘heartbroken’ for trans Harry Potter fans as he talks JK Rowling Current Affairs Sep 25 JD Vance claims James Talarico has a “weird obsession with children in drag” News Sep 25 Susan Sarandon, Hannah Einbinder and Caleb Hearon detained outside UN after protesting Netanyahu What to buy now Previous Next Fashion Mar 27 Connor Ives and MAC team up to re-release the iconic ‘Protect The Dolls’ t-shirt Music Mar 12 The Pussycat Dolls confirm reunion with new single and tour – how to get tickets Music Jan 23 A full guide to the 2026 Harry Styles Together, Together tour including dates and presale info Shopping Nov 24 2025 Ten truly awesome Christmas gifts you can buy to support queer-owned businesses Trans Sep 09 2025 Lush creates ‘luxurious’ trans flag bath bomb to support trans charities Tickets Jun 25 2025 Dolly Parton announces mini Las Vegas residency after wrapping her last tour almost a decade ago Shopping May 15 2025 LEGO celebrates late gay icon Keith Haring with new art set: ‘Want this so bad’ Music Apr 18 2025 Primavera Sound’s most iconic queer performances, from Troye Sivan to Ethel Cain Exclusive Previous Next Exclusive Sep 11 Ania Magliano talks SNL UK season two and anti-LGBTQ voices in comedy: ‘We do edgy in the right way’ Exclusive Sep 11 Elliot Tuttle on Blue Film’s personal inspiration, rejection and taboo: ‘It’s about loneliness’ Exclusive Sep 09 OF star Andy Lee on love for gay fans, ‘poisonous’ creators and ‘harmful’ stunts: ‘Gay men lift me up every day’ Exclusive Sep 07 Real Housewives of London spill the tea: ‘She’d go to the opening of a packet of crisps’ Opinion Sep 04 Katseye in London: A showcase of real talent deserving of the deafening screams Exclusive Sep 02 Adrian Chiarella and Joe Bird on tackling conversion therapy in gay horror Leviticus Exclusive Aug 21 Sziget Festival drag and circus troupe want audiences to feel like family Exclusive Aug 20 Gay wrestler Anthony Bowens says Heated Rivalry shows authentic life of closeted athletes Register to save articles and more. It'll only take a minute and it's free. JOIN US TODAY! Already have an account? Log in here "/> Download the PinkNews app Award winning LGBTQ+ journalism About us Editorial Policy Contact us Advertise Work for us Terms and conditions Privacy policy Privacy manager Privacy Manager