LGBT+ Rights in Belgium – A Short Guide Skip to content Discovering Belgium Revealing Belgium’s hidden stories, places and people Cities Hiking History Famous Belgians Castles Museums Art & Culture Shop More Blog On this day Events Calendar Quizzes Resources Search for... Search for... Search for... Discovering Belgium Revealing Belgium’s hidden stories, places and people Cities Hiking History Famous Belgians Castles Museums Art & Culture Shop More Blog On this day Events Calendar Quizzes Resources LGBT+ Rights in Belgium – A Short Guide February 25, 2024 August 26, 2025 Belgium has played a significant role in the advancement of LGBT+ rights within the European Union. Contents Toggle Historical development of LGBT+ rights in Belgium Key people involved LGBT+ rights organizations in Belgium Current status of LGBT+ rights in Belgium Where to report acts of homophobia Summary This is the third in my recent series on various aspects of human rights in Belgium. The first two looked at women’s rights in Belgium and the influence of religion on women’s rights . Here I provide a short overview of the historical development, key figures, and the current status of LGBT+ rights in Belgium. Historical development of LGBT+ rights in Belgium 18th century: Amazingly, sex between men was decriminalized in the area we now know as Belgium as far back as 1795. This was when France invaded the Austrian Low Countries and implemented its penal code, which did not criminalize sodomy. Not that homosexuals had an easy time. Legislation on acts of public indecency still existed – and what was a public space could be interpreted broadly if necessary. Moreover, the police could and did harass homosexuals and detain them at their pleasure. 19th century: In the newly formed state of Belgium, conservative views on sexuality prevailed, with the values of the Roman Catholic church in Belgium holding sway. Mid-20th century: Belgium saw some developments in activism and rights, particularly during the latter half of the century. The 1960s and 1970s marked the beginning of the modern LGBT+ rights movement globally, and Belgium saw the birth of its own movements during this time. Late 20th century: Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, Belgian LGBT+ activists campaigned for anti-discrimination laws and recognition of same-sex partnerships. In the next century, their work came to fruition … 21st century: In 2000, Belgium granted same-sex couples domestic partnership benefits. This was extended in 2003 when Belgium became the second country in the world to legalize same-sex marriage, after the Netherlands. In 2006, Belgium enacted laws allowing same-sex couples to adopt children, and lesbian couples were allowed to access IVF. Gender identity and expression protections were added to Belgium’s anti-discrimination laws in the early 2000s. Gay conversion therapy was banned in 2023. Key people involved Several figures have played significant roles in advancing LGBT+ rights in Belgium: Suzan Daniel (1918-2007): An iconic Brussels-born gay-rights activist often credited with driving the gay and queer rights movement in Belgium, after she founded Centre Culturel de Belgique, the country’s first-ever LGBTQ association. Eliane Morissens (1927-2006) was a Belgian teacher remembered for her activism and raising international awareness about employment discrimination against homosexuals. She was a catalyst for changing the laws regarding discrimination on the basis of sexuality in Belgium. Elio Di Rupo : the former Prime Minister of Belgium (2011-2014) is an openly gay man and was one of the first heads of government in the world to openly identify as LGBT. Petra De Sutter : her appointment as Minister of Civil Service in 2020 made Belgium one of the first countries in the world to have an openly transgender woman as a government minister. LGBT+ rights organizations in Belgium Belgian LGBT+ rights activists are grouped into several organizations. These include Çavaria and Wel Jong in Flanders and Brussels, and La Fédération Prisme in Wallonia and Brussels. The Rainbow House Brussels is home to various French and Dutch speaking LGBTQIA+ associations in the Brussels area. Current status of LGBT+ rights in Belgium Belgium remains one of the most progressive countries in Europe regarding LGBT+ rights. In 2023, ILGA-Europe (the European region of the International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and Intersex Association) ranked Belgium as second in the European Union for LGBT rights protection, behind Malta. Same-sex marriage and adoption rights are legally recognized. Discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity is prohibited by law. Belgium has comprehensive anti-discrimination laws that cover employment, housing, and public accommodation. Transgender individuals have the right to legally change their gender without undergoing surgery. Conversion therapy is banned. Where to report acts of homophobia If you are the victim of a crime with a gay, lesbian or transphobic motive, or you witnessed such a crime, and would like further information about the possibility to report it, there are many avenues to pursue. For urgent cases, you can call 101 for the police or 112 for an ambulance (112 on your smartphone). UNIA (Interfederal Centre for Equal Opportunities) offers an online reporting form if you have seen, heard or personally experienced discrimination or hate speech. The Brussels Police provides an LGBTQI+ Reporting Point . So does the Rainbow House . You could also contact one of the other organizations I mention above. Summary Belgium is frequently referred to as one of the most LGBT-friendly countries in the world, with recent polls indicating that a majority of Belgians support same-sex marriage and adoption rights. However, challenges such as societal attitudes, occasional incidents of violence, and discrimination still persist, as they do in many countries. Furthermore, as with women’s rights, religion still has a strong negative influence on equality and acceptance for LGBT+ individuals in Belgian society. I’ll be covering that topic in my next post. The 2024 Brussels Pride March takes place on Saturday 18th May 2024 More information on this topic can be found here . I have also researched and listed LGBT+ friendly churches in Belgium. Thanks to Timothy from Trip By Trip for his helpful comments on a first draft. Denzil Walton I created Discovering Belgium in 2011 to share the country’s hidden stories, fascinating places, and remarkable people. Through articles, photography, and audio walks, I share discoveries that reveal Belgium beyond the obvious. Hope you enjoy this site. Feel free to share: Share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Share on Pinterest (Opens in new window) Pinterest Share on Bluesky (Opens in new window) Bluesky Share on Reddit (Opens in new window) Reddit Email a link to a friend (Opens in new window) Email Share on X (Opens in new window) X Like this: Like Loading… Tags: LGBT-friendly 8 thoughts on “LGBT+ Rights in Belgium – A Short Guide” Timothy February 25, 2024 at 7:15 am Reply A great resource and starting point for English speakers looking for information on the state of affairs on LGBTQ issues in Belgium. 🙂 Loading... Denzil February 25, 2024 at 8:23 am Reply Thanks Timothy, also for your help. Loading... kiker115 July 5, 2025 at 4:34 pm Reply Dear she/her/he/him, I hope this message will find you well. I am writing on behalf of our local organisation called ‘Action pour le Développement Durable’, located in central African continent. We work to bring equal justice and we fight for the rights of the sexual minorities in our region. We wish to share with you this campaign to support members of our LGBTQ communities who are being persecuted in Uganda because of the tough anti LGBTQ law signed by the Ugandan government. We are trying to get them out of this situation and we request you to donate for this campaign and to share it with your network. I know we are fighting for the same cause so we have good reasons to count on your support. Thank you very much for your effort to make this campaign successful. Kind regards: The campaign is here: https://gofund.me/cfbecba8 Loading... Denzil Walton July 6, 2025 at 11:59 am Reply Thanks for this. Unfortunately the situation for LGBT+ brothers and sisters in Africa seems to be getting worse. I will support your action. Loading... Anabel @ The Glasgow Gallivanter February 25, 2024 at 9:45 pm Reply Malta surprises me, I thought it was quite a conservative place. Overall, well done Belgium! Loading... Rosaliene Bacchus February 25, 2024 at 10:47 pm Reply Kudos to Belgium for being in the forefront of promoting LGBT+ rights within the European Union! Loading... JOSE ALBEROLA February 26, 2024 at 12:03 pm Reply And still to donate blood in Brussels, gay men are heavily discriminated and nothing changes… Loading... Andrea Stephenson February 29, 2024 at 6:00 pm Reply Well done to Belgium for all the strides made so far. Loading... Add your comment or question: Cancel reply This site uses Akismet to reduce spam. Learn how your comment data is processed. About Contact (C) Discovering Belgium 2021 About Contact (C) Discovering Belgium 2021 Manage Consent To provide the best experiences, we use technologies like cookies to store and/or access device information. Consenting to these technologies will allow us to process data such as browsing behavior or unique IDs on this site. Not consenting or withdrawing consent, may adversely affect certain features and functions. Functional Functional Always active The technical storage or access is strictly necessary for the legitimate purpose of enabling the use of a specific service explicitly requested by the subscriber or user, or for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission of a communication over an electronic communications network. Preferences Preferences The technical storage or access is necessary for the legitimate purpose of storing preferences that are not requested by the subscriber or user. Statistics Statistics The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for statistical purposes. The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for anonymous statistical purposes. Without a subpoena, voluntary compliance on the part of your Internet Service Provider, or additional records from a third party, information stored or retrieved for this purpose alone cannot usually be used to identify you. Marketing Marketing The technical storage or access is required to create user profiles to send advertising, or to track the user on a website or across several websites for similar marketing purposes. Manage options Manage services Manage {vendor_count} vendors Read more about these purposes Accept Deny View preferences Save preferences View preferences {title} {title} {title} Manage consent %d