Gay Tuvalu News & Reports Archive Home Locations Africa Asia Caribbean Central America Europe Middle East North America Oceania South America https://GlobalGayz.com GlobalGayz is a gay-owned charitable travel and culture website focused on les-bi-gay-trans life in countries around the world. It is based on actual visits to far and near countries. Presented here are Stories, Links, News Reports and Photo Galleries for more than 190 countries. Contact Us | About Us Archive Home Locations Africa Asia Caribbean Central America Europe Middle East North America Oceania South America Menu Oceania > Tuvalu Gay Tuvalu News & Reports Richard Ammon | October 13, 2011 | Tuvalu | GlobalGayz 1 Decriminalizing Homosexuality–first step to establish equality 10/11 October 11, 2011 – Office of U.N. High Commissioner for Human Rights 1 Decriminalizing Homosexuality–first step to establish equality Op-ed by Matilda Bogner Decriminalizing homosexuality is an essential first step towards establishing genuine equality before the law Calls for truly universal application of human rights have been gathering momentum at the global level. The UN High Commissioner for Human Rights, Navi Pillay, and UN Secretary-General, Ban Ki-moon have both called for measures to counter discrimination and violence against those who are lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender or intersex (LGBTI). Last year, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon launched an appeal for the worldwide decriminalization of homosexuality and for every country to ensure equal rights for all people, regardless of sexual orientation or gender identity. The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, he said, is just that. It is universal and it applies to us all—whoever we are, whatever we look like, whoever we share our lives with. No exceptions. Pacific Island countries have supported this call, with Australia, Fiji, Marshall Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, Nauru, New Zealand, Palau, Samoa, Tuvalu and Vanuatu signing onto a joint statement of over 80 countries at the UN Human Rights Council condemning violence based on sexual orientation in March this year. The statement expressed concern at the continued evidence in every region of acts of violence and related human rights violations based on sexual orientation and gender identity, including killings, rape, torture and criminal sanctions. This message was underlined by a historic Human Rights Council resolution on 17 June 2011, expressing grave concern at acts of violence and discrimination, in all regions of the world, committed against individuals because of their sexual orientation and gender identity. The resolution requested the UN High Commissioner for Human Rights to commission a study, to be finalized by December 2011, documenting discriminatory laws and practices and acts of violence against LGBTI individuals, in all regions of the world, and how international human rights law can be used to end these violations. Laws criminalizing same-sex relations between consenting adults remain on the statute books in more than 70 countries globally, including the Pacific Island countries of Cook Islands, Kiribati, Nauru, Palau, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga and Tuvalu. Such laws are an affront to principles of equality and non-discrimination and fuel hatred and violence—in effect giving homophobia a State-sanctioned seal of approval. Recognising this, Palau and Nauru accepted recommendations to decriminalize homosexual acts during their appearances at the Human Rights Council. Pacific Island countries have now all completed the first round of the Human Rights Council’s Universal Periodic Review (UPR) of their human rights situation. Each country will return to the review in four years time to see what progress has been made in implementing their human rights commitments. During the most recent UPR meeting at the Human Rights Council, Samoa, Solomon Islands and Papua New Guinea rejected recommendations relating to the decriminalization of sexual relations between consenting adults of the same sex – citing cultural or religious reasons. The Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) is encouraging countries to make progress in the area of LGBTI rights, and in particular the decriminalization of sexual relations between consenting adults of the same sex. In a speech on Human Rights Day (10 December) 2010, UN Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said: “As men and women of conscience, we reject discrimination in general, and in particular discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity… Where there is tension between cultural attitudes and universal human rights, universal human rights must carry the day”. Decriminalizing homosexuality is an essential first step towards establishing genuine equality before the law. But real, lasting progress cannot be achieved by changing laws alone. We must change minds as well. Like racism and misogyny, homophobia is a prejudice born of ignorance. And like other forms of prejudice, the most effective long-term response is legal equality backed-up by information and education. *Matilda Bogner is the Regional Representative for the United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR) Regional Office for the Pacific, based in Suva, Fiji. For further information and media requests to OHCHR’s Regional Office for the Pacific in Suva, please contact Communications Officer Jacob Quinn at + (679) 331 0465 (ext. 211), or by email Search Search for: Countries Countries Select Category Africa Algeria All Africa News & Reports Angola Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Chad Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Ethiopia Gabon Gambia Ghana Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Republic of the Congo Rwanda Saint Helena Sao Tome and Principe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa Sudan Sudan & South Sudan Swaziland (Eswatini) Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan All Asia News & Reports Armenia Azerbaijan Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Burma Cambodia China East Timor Georgia Guam Hong Kong India Indonesia Japan Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Laos Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Nepal North Korea Oman Pakistan Philippines Singapore South Korea Sri Lanka Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Tibet Turkmenistan Uzbekistan Vietnam Caribbean All Caribbean News & Reports Antigua and Barbuda Aruba Bahamas Barbados Bermuda Cuba Curacao Dominica Dominican Republic Grenada Haiti Jamaica Martinique and Guadeloupe Montserrat Netherlands Antilles Puerto Rico Saba Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines St Eustatius Trinidad and Tobago Turks and Caicos Islands Virgin Islands, U.S. Central America All Central America News & Reports Belize Costa Rica El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Mexico Nicaragua Panama Europe Albania All Europe News & Reports Andorra Austria Belarus Belgium Bosnia Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Gibraltar Greece Greenland Holland Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kosovo Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Macedonia Malta Moldova Montenegro Northern Ireland Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia Scotland Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Middle East All Middle East News & Reports Bahrain Dubai Iran Iraq Israel Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Palestine Qatar Saudi Arabia Syria United Arab Emirates Yemen Multi-national Gay News & Reports North America Canada United States Oceania All Oceania News & Reports Antarctica Australia Cook Islands Fiji Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Pitcairn Samoa Solomon Islands Tahiti Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Religion Christianity Islam Judaism Muslim South America All South America News & Reports Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela U.S. GlobalGayz: The Book Life and Death in a Global Gay World by Richard A. Ammon True Stores and In-Person Interviews From a Hundred Countries From Persecution to Pride From Australia to Zambia Click Here to Purchase: 548 page paperback - $39.95 (Color photos) 548 page paperback - $19.95 (B&W photos) 548 page digital eBook - $6.99 (Color photos) ADS Credits | Site Sponsorship Opportunities | Privacy Policy Introduction | Human Rights | Contact GlobalGayz.com - Laguna Beach, CA and Westhampton, MA Site Contents Copyright © 2026 GlobalGayz News Archive.com. - All Rights Reserved © 2026 GlobalGayz News Archive.com. Privacy Policy. Follow GlobalGayz on twitter or rss