Greece | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Greece At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Legal Gender Recognition Possible? Yes LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? Yes Last Update: March 12, 2026 Greece ranked seventh in Europe on ILGA‑Europe’s 2025 Rainbow Map , reflecting significant progress toward equality. In 2022, the country banned conversion practices for minors and prohibited intersex genital mutilation, making it a crime if done to someone under the age of fifteen. In 2023, Greece adopted a National Strategy for Equality of LGBTQI+ people (2021-2023), which was followed by rapid legal progress in several areas. In March 2023, Parliament adopted legislation to combat bullying and violence in education, which recognizes the grounds of sexual orientation, gender identity and expression, and sex characteristics. A 2023 law also banned employment discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity. In February 2024, Equal Treatment Law 4443/2016 was amended by Law 5089/20249 and the grounds of discrimination were extended to include sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, and gender characteristics in the areas of social protection, social benefits and tax relief, education, and access to the provision of goods and services (see Section 4 of the executive summary on “Material Scope”). Under the same law, Greece became the first Christian Orthodox-majority country to legalize same-sex marriage and extend full adoption rights to same‑sex couples . Transgender people may change their legal gender markers without medical intervention or sterilization, although a court judgment is required. In 2024, the Greek Ministry of Foreign Affairs launched an Equality Action Plan 2024-2027 as part of its effort to improve the conditions under which the Ministry’s workforce carries out its mission. The plan includes targeted actions such as providing support and guidance for LGBTQI+ staff and their family members, updating internal guidelines on queer issues, and adding related resources to the Ministry intranet’s host‑country information “family page” during 2026–2027. The 2023 Eurobarometer found that 57 percent of Greeks believed same-sex marriage should be allowed throughout Europe, while 40 percent were opposed. The survey also found that 57 percent of Greeks believed that “there is nothing wrong in a sexual relationship between two persons of the same sex,” while 40 percent disagreed. However, ILGA‑Europe’s 2025 Annual Review documented continued incidents of anti‑LGBTIQ violence in 2024, including against trans people and protesters in Thessaloniki, as well as increased hate speech from conservative public figures during the marriage equality debate. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International