Gender change, protection of modesty among provisions in new Kelantan Syariah Bill | The Star × View Subscriptions person person Profile Change Password Manage Logins Subscription Info Transactions Billing Info Manage For You Bookmarks Package & Pricing FAQs Log Out Toggle navigation Toggle navigation StarPlus News Asean+ ESG Business Sport Metro Lifestyle Food Tech Education Opinion Videos Photos StarPicks Subscriptions person person Profile Change Password Manage Logins Subscription Info Transactions Billing Info Manage For You Bookmarks Package & Pricing FAQs Log Out Home StarPlus News Latest Nation World Environment In Other Media True or Not Focus Asean+ ESG Business News Insight Unit Trust Exchange Rates My Portfolio Market Watch Bursa Overview Market Movers Financial Results Dividends Bonus IPO Sport Football Golf Badminton Tennis Motorsport Athletics Hockey Other Sports Say What Metro Metro News Community Sports Views Lifestyle Entertainment & Style People & Living Health & Family Travel & Culture Viewpoints Food Food News Eating Out Food for Thought Kuali Tech Tech Thoughts Education News Opinion Columnists Letters Videos Photos StarPicks More Classifieds Events StarCherish.com - pts chevron_right info_outline Stay signed in to save your points and redeem your rewards at Nexus featured_seasonal_and_gifts +0 × Your Rewards are Waiting! Stay signed in to save the points you've earned. Click on the points to redeem your rewards at Nexus before they expire. Login In Now Don't show this again Nation Gender change, protection of modesty among provisions in new Kelantan Syariah Bill By RAHIMY RAHIM and FAZLEENA AZIZ Wednesday, 12 Aug 2026 | 3:39 PM MYT share bookmark Related Stories Nation 18 Sep 2026 Perak Umno: Najib's pardon in accordance with constitutional provisions Star Biz7 16 May 2026 Asia-Pacific banks raise provisions Nation 11 Jun 2026 Egyptian pharmacy programme recognition: MOH considering student eligibility under provisions of Act 371 PETALING JAYA: Provisions on covering aurat, gender change and safeguarding the modesty of private parts are among those covered under the newly passed Syariah Criminal Offences (Kelantan) Bill 2026. The enactment aims to replace 16 provisions in the Kelantan Syariah Criminal Code Enactment 2019 that were struck down by the Federal Court last year. Under Clause 15, it mandates that Muslims safeguard the sanctity and modesty of their private parts in accordance with Islamic law. According to the legislation, the clause also provides for the punishment for the offence of the obligation to safeguard the private part. "Any Muslim who uses their private part or allows the use of his private part for a purpose or in a manner contrary to Islamic law commits an offence and shall, on conviction, be liable to whipping not less than three strokes and not exceeding six strokes, and shall also be liable to a fine not exceeding RM5,000 or to imprisonment for a term not exceeding three years or to both," it said. Under Clause 17, the legislation makes it an offence for any Muslim to change their own gender or cause their gender to be changed, change or cause another person's gender to be changed, or induce someone to change their gender without a reason permitted under Islamic law. Those found guilty face a fine of up to RM3,000, imprisonment for up to two years, or both. The enactment also makes it an offence for a Muslim man to wear women's clothing or attire traditionally regarded as being worn only by women, or to behave like a woman in any public place or in a private place that is visible or accessible to the public. Those found guilty face a fine of up to RM3,000, imprisonment for up to two years, or both. Clause 19 also requires every Muslim woman, in accordance with Islamic law, to refrain from imitating characteristics, styles or actions deemed specific to men, including the way men dress, speak, move or behave. The clause also provides for punishment for the offence. Clause 22 requires every Muslim, in accordance with Islamic law, to safeguard their dignity in public places or private places visible or accessible to the public by refraining from exposing their aurat. The clause also provides for punishment for the offence of exposing aurat (parts of the body that must not be exposed in public in accordance with Islamic belief). The provision also covers wearing tight, thin or sparse clothing that reveals the shape of the body or skin colour, clothing bearing pictures or symbols deemed contrary to Islamic law, or immodest clothing. Those found guilty face a fine of up to RM1,000, imprisonment for up to six months, or both. The court may also, upon conviction, make an order under Section 57 instead of imposing the prescribed punishment. Clause 32 requires every Muslim, in accordance with Islamic law, to give a truthful statement in any matter relating to the administration of Islam. The clause provides for punishment for the offence of syahadatul zur, or giving false testimony. Muslims who produce false documents, provide false information or falsify statements for matters relating to the administration of Islam face a fine of up to RM5,000, up to three years in jail, or both under the legislation. Clauses 23, 24 and 25 require Muslims to preserve harmony and peace in their own marriages and respect the marriages of others. The provisions cover offences including disrupting another person's marriage, preventing a married couple from living together as husband and wife, and encouraging a husband or wife to seek a divorce. Additionally, Clause 34 makes it an offence for any Muslim to consume or attempt to consume an intoxicating drink, as defined under Islamic law, in any public or private place. Those convicted face six strokes of the cane, as well as a fine of up to RM5,000, imprisonment for up to three years, or both. The legislation also states that “consume” includes testing positive for alcohol in a breath test. Follow us on our official WhatsApp channel for breaking news alerts and key updates! Tags / Keywords: Provisions , Syariah Criminal Offences Bill , Kelantan , Legislation , Clauses , Offences Report a mistake What is the issue about? Spelling and grammatical error Factually incorrect Story is irrelevant This field is mandatory. Please provide details of the report. Email (optional) Please enter valid email. Report issue Cancel Invalid captcha response. Please re-try again. Thank you for your report! Related News Nation 18 Sep 2026 Perak Umno: Najib's pardon in accordance with constitutional provisions Nation 12 Aug 2026 Gender change, protection of modesty among provisions in new Kelantan Syariah Bill Star Biz7 16 May 2026 Asia-Pacific banks raise provisions × StarPicks SUNWAY EXPANSION TO BOOST JOHOR HEALTHCARE Next In Nation Negri reps leave Umno HQ without speaking to media after meeting Malaysia, UNODC strengthen pact against complex transnational crimes University holdings, including UiTM Holdings under review since 2025, says Zambry Malaysia, Kazakhstan to revive higher education cooperation, says Zambry Bangkok floods: Embassy distributes food aid to flood victims Year Two Pupil dies in crash on the way to school Negri crisis: BN reps arrive for talks with Ahmad Zahid Anwar congratulates Eain Yow for defending Asiad squash gold Dr Zaliha denies officiating groundbreaking ceremonies for Myanmar refugee settlements Brewhaha: RM1mil in smuggled coffee seedlings, lorry seized Trending in News Others Also Read Load more Subscriptions The Star Digital Access Newsstand Advertising Our Rate Card Classifieds Company Info About Us Job Opportunities Investor Relations Help Contact Us FAQs Policies Privacy Statement Terms & Conditions Copyright © 1995- Star Media Group Berhad [197101000523 (10894-D)] Best viewed on Chrome browsers. Home For You Bookmark Audio Search Download now! We would love to keep you posted on the latest promotion. Kindly fill the form below Skip Disclaimer: by clicking the Submit button, it is deemed that you consent to the rules and terms set forth in the Privacy Policy as well as Terms and Conditions set forth by this site. Thank you for downloading. We hope you enjoy this feature! Didn't work? Try downloading again.