Austria | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Austria At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? No Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? No Legal Gender Recognition Possible? No LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? No Last Update: March 12, 2026 Austria has made significant legal progress on LGBTIQ people’s rights over the past several decades. Same-sex sexual activity has been legal since 1971, marriage equality recognized since 2017 following a landmark ruling by the Constitutional Court of Austria, and full adoption rights granted for same-sex couples since 2016. In 2015, Austria recognized automatic co-parenthood for same-sex couples in marriages or registered partnerships, strengthening family protections. Austria’s Equal Treatment Act prohibits discrimination in employment based on sexual orientation, and recent amendments broaden the definition of gender to include gender identity, gender expression, and sex characteristics. Legal gender recognition is possible without mandatory medical procedures, and individuals may obtain an “X,” indeterminate, or no gender marker on official documents. Recognition of intersex individuals has advanced, with Austria allowing “open,” “diverse,” “inter,” or no gender designation at all as gender markers on birth certificates, if it “is not possible for the doctor or midwife to clearly assign the gender to male or female after the birth of the child.” Intersex activists have applauded the availability of multiple options, but have criticized as a “missed opportunity” the policy’s pathologization of intersex people and the unavailability of a range of gender markers for trans and nonbinary people. In 2018, the Constitutional Court ruled that intersex genital mutilation “should be avoided as much as possible.” However, this decision was not binding, and authorities have not yet banned the practice. The government has also taken steps to address historical injustices. In March 2024, Austria established a €33 million [US$38.2 million] compensation fund to provide financial redress to individuals prosecuted under discriminatory laws that remained in force until the early 2000s. Social acceptance is relatively high compared to global averages, with Austria ranking 25th out of 175 countries on the Global Acceptance Index , and visible public support reflected in large Pride events , despite increased security needs due to isolated incidents of hostility. However, challenges remain, particularly for trans, nonbinary, and intersex people. Legal gender recognition still requires expert psychiatric opinions affirming a permanent gender identity. Political debates during the 2024 election campaign included proposals to restrict gender-affirming care for minors, reflecting broader polarization. Overall, Austria maintains strong legal protections and relatively high social acceptance, but ongoing advocacy focuses on removing medical barriers to gender recognition and strengthening protections for trans and intersex individuals. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International