Comoros | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Comoros At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? No Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? No Legal Gender Recognition Possible? No LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? No Last Update: March 12, 2026 In Comoros, same-sex intimacy is criminalized under Article 300 of the penal code (2020) , which punishes “​​any act of a sexual nature that is contrary to public decency or against nature” with six months to two years in prison and a fine of 100,000 to 300,000 francs [US$240-720]. LGBTIQ people in Comoros are not protected from discrimination based on sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, or sex characteristics. Trans people are not allowed to change their legal gender markers , while intersex infants and children are not protected from nonconsensual medical interventions seeking to “normalize” their bodies. In 2022, a video of two men engaging in same-sex sexual acts leaked on social media, allegedly leading to the first imprisonment for same-sex intimacy in the country . In June 2024, for the first time, two women were arrested and detained for same-sex intimacy after reportedly asking an Islamic preacher to marry them. In December 2024, the couple was convicted, sentenced to time served, and released from prison. The government has repeatedly refused to adopt recommendations by UN bodies and other states to decriminalize same-sex conduct and to protect LGBTIQ people from discrimination. There are no known LGBTIQ organizations in the country. While LGBTIQ organizing is not explicitly outlawed, the criminalization of same-sex intimacy poses barriers for LGBTIQ groups to register. In addition, Article 5 of Law No. 86-006/AF (1986) prohibits the establishment of associations founded on an “unlawful cause or for an unlawful purpose, contrary to the law or public morals,” a restriction which could be misused against LGBTIQ groups. There is a dearth of information on LGBTIQ people’s lived realities in the country, but available reports indicate that some LGBTIQ people in Comoros are rejected by or excluded from their families , neighborhoods, or villages. A U.S. State Department report found that sexual and gender minorities in the country “generally did not publicly reveal their sexual orientation or gender identity due to societal pressure.” In a 2023 survey , only 26 percent of people surveyed in Comoros believed that their area of residence was a good place to live for gay or lesbian people. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International