South Korea's first transgender soldier found dead Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Home News US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business World of Business Technology of Business NYSE Opening Bell Technology Artificial Intelligence Intelligence Revolution AI v the Mind Tech Now Health Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList To the Ends of the Earth Earth Science Natural Wonders Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcast Categories Radio Audio FAQs Video BBC Maestro Discover the World Live Live News Live Sport Site search Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters South Korea's first transgender soldier found dead 3 March 2021 Share Save Add as preferred on Google AFP Ms Byun's case triggered debate about the treatment of transgender troops South Korea's first transgender soldier, who was discharged from the military for undergoing gender reassignment surgery, has been found dead at her home. The cause of death of Byun Hee-soo, a transgender rights campaigner, is not yet known. She launched a landmark legal challenge against the military in January last year over her dismissal. Her petition for reinstatement was rejected in July. South Korea remains conservative on matters relating to the LGBT community. The 23-year-old had been receiving counselling from a mental health centre near her home in Cheongju in Chungcheong province (which is south of Seoul). Her counsellor became concerned after not hearing from her since 28 February and called emergency services. South Korea soldier: ‘Criminal because I’m gay’ 'She said I don't need a son like you' Ms Byun's case triggered debate about the treatment of transgender troops and soldiers from the LGBTQ community in the country. She previously told reporters that apart from her gender identity, she wanted to show everyone that she could also be one of the great soldiers who protect the country. All able-bodied South Korean men are required to carry out military service for nearly two years. In December, the National Human Rights Commission of Korea said the decision not to allow her to continue to serve in the military had no legal grounds. In March last year, Byun Hui-soo said she would fight to remain a soldier South Korea is far less tolerant of the LGBTQ community than its East Asian neighbours. Being LGBT is often seen as a disability or a mental illness, or by powerful conservative churches as a sin, and there are no anti-discrimination laws in the country. In Ms Byun's case, anti-LGBT campaigners had attempted to identify her online. They also held demonstrations urging the military to dismiss her after news about the case emerged and have called for further demonstrations. Transgender soldier to sue military over dismissal 'She said I don't need a son like you' South Korea LGBT Transgender people Related Before BTS and Blackpink, there was Big Bang: Now the Kings of K-pop are back Indians are discovering the thrill of shopping without paying When a beloved tree began withering away, locals suspected a killer in their midst More from the BBC 9 hrs ago Theft of church Pride banner reported as hate crime The vicar of St Mark's Church in Sheffield says it is not the first time such items have been taken. 9 hrs ago 1 day ago Rainbow flag wrapped around castle for Pride event Totnes Castle is wrapped in a rainbow flag as part of the Devon town's Pride celebrations. 1 day ago 1 day ago Senedd presiding officer accuses Reform MS of offensive comments in Welsh Gender Service debate Joe Martin called for "butcher" doctors who performed surgery on children to be jailed. 1 day ago 2 days ago 'More will turn up' - Work by Scottish artists unearthed for homecoming exhibition Robert Colquhoun and Robert MacBryde were among the most celebrated figures in British art. 2 days ago 2 days ago Sandie Peggie's views had 'no bearing' on refusing legal support, union says The RCN says its decision not to give Sandie Peggie legal advice had nothing to do with her gender critical views. 2 days ago British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages The BBC is in multiple languages Read the BBC In your own language BBC News Brasil BBC News Mundo (Spanish) BBC News မြန်မာ (Burmese) BBC News 中文 (Chinese) BBC News Indonesia BBC News 코리아 (Korean) BBC News ไทย (Thai) BBC News Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese) BBC News Azərbaycanca (Azeri) BBC News Magyarul (Hungarian) BBC News Кыргыз Кызматы (Kyrgyz) BBC News Polska (Polish) BBC News România (Romanian) BBC News Русская служба (Russian) BBC News na srpskom (Serbian) BBC News Україна (Ukrainian) BBC News O'zbek (Uzbek) BBC News عربي (Arabic) BBC News فارسی (Persian) BBC News Türkçe (Turkish) BBC News বাংলা (Bengali) BBC News دری (Dari) BBC News ગુજરાતી (Gujarati) BBC News हिन्दी (Hindi) BBC News मराठी (Marathi) BBC News नेपाली (Nepali) BBC News සිංහල (Sinhala) BBC News ਪੰਜਾਬੀ (Punjabi) BBC News Afaan Oromoo BBC News አማርኛ (Amharic) BBC News Afrique (French) BBC News Hausa BBC News Gaelic NAIDHEACHDAN BBC News Ìgbò BBC News Japanese 日本語 BBC News Gahuza BBC News Pidgin BBC News Somali BBC News Swahili BBC News தமிழ் (Tamil) BBC News తెలుగు (Telugu) BBC News ትግርኛ (Tigrinya) BBC News اردو (Urdu) BBC News Yorùbá BBC News World Service Follow BBC on: Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Do not share or sell my info Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us BBC.com Help & FAQs Content Index Set Preferred Source Copyright 2026 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.