Macedonia Moves to Rule Out Same-Sex Marriage | Balkan Insight Back to BalkanInsight About Premium Subscription Newsletters Contact Follow us Search Countries Albania Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Greece Kosovo Moldova Montenegro North Macedonia Romania Serbia Turkey In Focus Balkan Transitional Justice Reporting Democracy Focus on Ukraine Focus on Gender Justice Balkan Migrant Route Balkan Media Watch Digital Rights Bulgaria-North Macedonia dispute Paper Trail: Investigations Russia in the Balkans Turkey and the Balkans Open Data and E-Governance China in the Balkans Focus on Far Right Environment Serbia-Kosovo Relations News Premium All Opinions Analysis Investigations Profiles Features Interviews Subscribe Newsletters Sign in News Macedonia Moves to Rule Out Same-Sex Marriage Sinisa Jakov Marusic Skopje BIRN July 1, 2014 08:21 The Macedonian parliament is soon expected to discuss the government's newly-submitted motion for a constitutional change aimed at ruling out same-sex marriage and gay adoption. Macedonian PM, Nikola Gruevski and government ministers | Photo by: gov.mk The motion to define marriage strictly as a union of one man and one woman, submitted at the weekend, was one of the first orders of business of the conservative Government of Prime Minister Nikola Gruevski after it was re-elected in April. “The constitutional protection and the clear defining of marriage will allow further protection of children and affirmation of their upbringing in a family atmosphere in which the main pillars are the parents, the father and mother,” government spokesperson Aleksandar Gjorgjiev said. In order to pass, the motion needs the support from two-thirds of MP’s in the 123-seat assembly. The ruling parties are close to controlling two-thirds in parliament but can not pass the changes alone. It is expected that the opposition Democratic Party of Albanians, DPA, a party with a conservative outlook which controls seven MPs, could provide the additional votes. This is not the first attempt of the authorities to pass a constitutional change that is deemed anti-gay. In 2010 when Macedonia’s five leading faiths united against gay marriage and pushed for the same initiative, Gruevski’s main ruling VMRO DPMNE party supported it. Last year the ruling party submitted the proposal to parliament through MP Vlatko Gjorcev but it did not muster the needed two-third majority. Then the main opposition Social Democrats, SDSM refused to support the motion, saying it was completely obsolete, as the Law on the Family passed in the 1990s already defined marriage in heterosexual terms. Macedonian family law professor Dejan Mickovic said that he sees the government’s latest push as a “strictly political decision” aimed at “strengthening the traditional notion of marriage” against any possible attempts to allow homosexuals to marry or adopt children in the future. The government motion comes after rights groups earlier this month urged the state Anti-Discrimination Commission to take action over new ‘family studies’ courses at the country’s biggest state university that define divorce and homosexuality as deviations . Sts Cyril and Methodius University recently said that it is to open an ‘Institute of Family Studies’, which some commentators on social networks saw as effectively the work of the Gruevski government, which has pursued a socially conservative agenda since taking power in 2006. The government has remained silent about the whole issue, as has the state Anti-Discrimination Commission. Last June, the VMRO DPMNE party-led government adopted new abortion legislation that critics said curbs women’s rights. The changes were adopted amid protests by activists and in the absence from parliament of opposition parties. The government has also backed an anti-abortion media campaign that described terminations as murder. In 2010, Macedonia adopted an anti-discrimination law. However, this did not include explicit protection against discrimination based on sexual orientation. Earlier, in 2009, the government tried to boost population growth by giving cash bonuses to mothers with more than one child. However, this was outlawed by the Constitutional Court on the grounds that it was discriminatory. The same provision remains active but in a different form. Human Rights Macedonian Government North Macedonia BIRN VIEW ALL POSTS Latest premium September 25, 2026 Review Week in Review: Spyware, AI and Arrests September 25, 2026 Video ARTE Europe Weekly: Datacentres and Hidden Cost of Digital Progress September 25, 2026 Review Democracy Digest: Czechia Restricts Rules for Russian Diplomats Travelling September 25, 2026 Feature Fading Away: Sicily’s Ancient Albanian Community Fears its Identity Risks Erasure September 25, 2026 Opinion Bringing the Balkans into Schengen: a Win-Win Scenario for Europe Subscribe to Premium Content Most popular September 24, 2026 Opinion Albania’s Cannabis Traffic is No Longer Only One-Way September 22, 2026 News Albania's Intelligence Chief Suspended for Allegedly Aiding Crime Group September 23, 2026 Investigation Netanyahu Lawyer Part of Operation to Build Israeli Drones in Serbia September 25, 2026 Review Week in Review: Spyware, AI and Arrests September 23, 2026 Opinion As Geopolitical Competition Intensifies, the EU’s Balkans Policy Must Adapt About About Us The Team Supporters and Partners Awards Subscription Premium Subscription Personal Subscription Institutional Subscription Student Subscription Terms & Policies General Terms of Use Personal Terms of Use Institutional Terms of Use Privacy Policy Cookie Policy Copyright Notice Republishing Policy Community Guidelines Editorial Standards Editorial Corrections & Complaints Letters to the Editor Engage Newsletters RSS Feeds Contact Services BIRN Consultancy Follow us Copyright BIRN 2026 | Powered by WordPress / WPML Published by BIRN Manage Consent To provide the best experiences, we and our partners use technologies like cookies to store and/or access device information. Consenting to these technologies will allow us and our partners to process personal data such as browsing behavior or unique IDs on this site and show (non-) personalized ads. Not consenting or withdrawing consent, may adversely affect certain features and functions. Click below to consent to the above or make granular choices. Your choices will be applied to this site only. You can change your settings at any time, including withdrawing your consent, by using the toggles on the Cookie Policy, or by clicking on the manage consent button at the bottom of the screen. Functional Functional Always active The technical storage or access is strictly necessary for the legitimate purpose of enabling the use of a specific service explicitly requested by the subscriber or user, or for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission of a communication over an electronic communications network. Preferences Preferences The technical storage or access is necessary for the legitimate purpose of storing preferences that are not requested by the subscriber or user. Statistics Statistics The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for statistical purposes. The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for anonymous statistical purposes. Without a subpoena, voluntary compliance on the part of your Internet Service Provider, or additional records from a third party, information stored or retrieved for this purpose alone cannot usually be used to identify you. Marketing Marketing The technical storage or access is required to create user profiles to send advertising, or to track the user on a website or across several websites for similar marketing purposes. Statistics Marketing Features Always active Always active Manage options Manage services Manage {vendor_count} vendors Read more about these purposes Accept Deny View preferences Save preferences View preferences {title} {title} {title} Manage consent