Edition IN IN US Sign In TOI City raipur mumbai delhi bengaluru Hyderabad kolkata chennai agra agartala ahmedabad ajmer amaravati amritsar bareilly bhubaneswar bhopal chandigarh chhatrapati sambhajinagar coimbatore cuttack dehradun erode faridabad ghaziabad goa gurgaon guwahati hubballi imphal indore itanagar jaipur jammu jamshedpur jodhpur kanpur kochi kohima kolhapur kozhikode ludhiana lucknow madurai mangaluru meerut mumbai region mysuru nagpur nashik navi mumbai noida patna prayagraj puducherry pune rajkot ranchi thane salem shillong shimla srinagar surat trichy thiruvananthapuram udaipur vadodara varanasi vijayawada visakhapatnam photos Web Stories Today's ePaper weather chhattisgarh elections News City News raipur News Chhattisgarh: Rs 12 lakh ‘supari’ killing of transgender for ‘Guru ki Gaddi’ Trending Bengaluru Vlogger Murder Eknath Shinde Cyclone Fengal Air India Pilot Suicide Chhattisgarh Man Death Tamil Nadu Rain Bengaluru Vlogger Murder Eknath Shinde Cyclone Fengal Air India Pilot Suicide Chhattisgarh Man Death Tamil Nadu Rain Bengaluru Vlogger Murder Eknath Shinde Cyclone Fengal Air India Pilot Suicide Chhattisgarh Man Death Tamil Nadu Rain Chhattisgarh: Rs 12 lakh ‘supari’ killing of transgender for ‘Guru ki Gaddi’ Rashmi Drolia / TNN / Updated: Nov 22, 2024, 07:40 IST Share AA + Text Size Small Medium Large Follow us A transgender woman named Kajal, also known as Coca Cola, was found murdered in an abandoned quarry in Chhattisgarh, India. Police investigation revealed that a rival within the transgender community, Tapasya, orchestrated the killing, paying contract killers Rs 12 lakh to prevent Kajal's rise to leadership. Five suspects, including Tapasya, have been apprehended. Tapasya, one of the accused RAIPUR: Power tussle, rivalry, and betrayal with the community led to the gruesome murder of a transgender in Baloda Bazar district of Chhattisgarh. The body of Kajal, also known as Coca Cola, was recovered from an abandoned quarry in village Dhabadih on Monday. Baloda Bazar police have cracked the blind murder mystery of the transgender on Wednesday with the arrest of five people. Police claimed that Rs 12 lakh were paid to contract killers to execute the murder by a rival group within the transgender community. According to cops, the transgender, Kajal, was murdered by some other members of the community with the help of contract killers to prevent her ascension to the seat as head of the community, Jora Math— a position of influence and prestige. Tattooed body of Kajal, along with a bundle of currency notes was found at the abandoned stone quarry. Kajal was a strong contender for the ‘guru gaddi', the head of the community in Raipur. In a bid to eliminate her from the path, a rival, Tapasya, allegedly orchestrated the murder, by paying ₹12 lakh to contract killers. Police said Tapasya, who originally hails from Mumbai, teamed up with Nisha, another transgender from Raipur, to plot Kajal's murder. The duo began planning in Sep 2024 and Tapasya raised the funds and paid Rs 6 lakh to a contract killer through Nisha. However, the initial hitman was arrested in an unrelated case, forcing them to hire two new killers, Ankush and Kuldeep. Two days before the murder, Nisha and driver Himanshu, visited the quarry. On the evening of Nov 17, Nisha lured Kajal into her car on the pretext of collecting Rs three lakh from an acquaintance and promising her a share of Rs 1.5 lakh. They were accompanied by the driver Himanshu. Kajal joined them clueless that it was a trap. The killers, Ankush and Kuldeep, followed them on a motorcycle. The car was stopped near Amera village, where Ankush and Kuldeep handed over the cash to Nisha. From the amount Kajal took ₹1.5 lakh for herself, unaware of the impending danger. They then proceeded to the quarry. Under the cover of darkness, Nisha and Himanshu left Kajal at the site, pretending to retrieve something from the car. Moments later, Ankush and Kuldeep ambushed Kajal, stabbing her multiple times. Kajal's body was thrown into the quarry to make it appear like an accidental drowning. The body was found floating in the quarry the next day. Police recovered three bundles of Rs 500 notes totalling Rs 1.5 lakh from her clothing, raising suspicions. Forensic teams gathered evidence pointing to foul play. Using cyber forensics and technical surveillance, the police zeroed in on the suspects. By Wednesday, all five accused were in custody. They were identified as Tapasya, alias Mohammad Imran Bhoir, the alleged mastermind, Nisha Srivastava and accomplice Ankush Chaudhary and Kuldeep Kuril, the contract killers Himanshu Banjare, driver Ankush Chaudhary and Kuldeep Kuril. The police also seized Rs 10.5 lakh cash, a car, a motorcycle and the murder weapon from their possession. The accused confessed that there was intense rivalry within the transgender community over leadership roles. Tapasya reportedly saw Kajal as her biggest obstacle to becoming the head of Jora Math. About the Author Rashmi Drolia Rashmi is a Special Correspondent with The Times of India in Chhattisgarh. She covers Politics, Left Wing Extremism, Crime and Human Rights among other areas of news value. End of Article FOLLOW US ON SOCIAL MEDIA Visual Stories Previous 10 foods that are typically loved in Mumbai Food How to make perfect street style Bhel Puri at home Food 10 golden rules families should have for happier homes Lifestyle 10 most delicious ways to cook Palak (spinach) Food Japanese mom turns simple dishes into adorable food art Food How to make delicious Soybean Pulao at home Food Lavanya Tripathi is a mesmerizing vision of beauty in sarees Entertainment ​10 longest living animals​ Lifestyle 10 daily habits of happy couples Lifestyle 8 South Indian delicacies that make for a light meal Food Next 1 2 3 Photostories Top national parks to visit in India in December to see tigers Bigg Boss 18: From an approximate net worth of Rs 237 crores to a luxurious house in London: Lavish life of Shilpa Shirodkar Bigg Boss 18: Confirmed list of the contestants of Salman Khan hosted controversial show 5 countries with the best anti-aircraft missile systems in the world ​From Drashti Dhami to Prince Narula, Yuvika Chaudhary; Unique names the celebs chose for their children 6 problematic things in the household that are not letting you flourish and prosper Bigg Boss 18: From debut with a dance number in Ravi Teja-starrer Ravanasura to participating in the controversial reality show; A look at lesser known facts about wildcard contestant Edin Rose From Rupali Ganguly to Gaurav Khanna: Education qualification of popular Anupamaa stars ​7 day meal plan for weight loss and inflammation​ From remembering late actor Dinesh Phadnis to Daya assuming he was offered ACP's role; Aditya Srivastava and Dayanand Shetty recall their best memories from CID ​Common mistakes why magnesium supplements do not work​ From Govinda and Krushna Abhishek’s reunion in The Great Indian Kapil Show to Alice Kaushik on her viral ‘cuddling’ clip in Bigg Boss 18; Top TV news 1 2 3 Hot Picks Delhi Air Pollution Bank Holidays December 2024 Hindu Temple Attack Meghan Markle Chennai Heavy Rain Sukhoi-30 Barron Trump Pete Hegseth TOP TRENDING CAT Answer Key Devendra Fadnavis RCB Team Squad IPL Players List CBSE Date Sheet 2025 Rob Gronkowski IPL 2025 Unsold Player List Chennai Cyclone IPL Auction Players of All Team Meghan Markle Trending Stories In City Entire Website Maharashtra CM pick: Day after Mahayuti leaders' meet, Eknath Shinde goes to his village, talks on govt pushed back Maharashtra government withdraws Rs 10 crore grant to Waqf Board; Fadnavis says order to be investigated Rob Gronkowski skips FOX Sunday after Terry Bradshaw’s apology to honor $16 Billion company commitment Margashirsha Amavasya on November 30, 2024: Timings, Rituals and Significance Reports indicate Deion Sanders is being considered for the head coaching position at the Dallas Cowboys, following Mike McCarthy's firing Daughter stripped, mother beaten by neighbours over water dispute in Navi Mumbai Atishi vows AAP won’t field candidate against BJP’s Vijender Gupta in Delhi elections—but on one condition Maharashtra polls: EC invites Congress to review 'legitimate' concerns in person over results discrepancy Zomato CEO has a 'special weekend' update: "No need to pay us Rs 20 lakh, just pay us...." The book written by Hindu Guru that Apple founder Steve Jobs ordered to be given at his memorial service ‘Wave goodbye to America’: Trump threatens tariff on Brics nations over plans to replace US dollar Ajit Pawar reveals what went inside Mahayuti meeting with Amit Shah Eknath Shinde is sulking. What will his big decision on Monday be? Delhi pollution: Air quality still very poor, not likely to get better soon Maharashtra govt formation: It's fair we insist on home portfolio, says Shinde Sena AAP MLA Naresh Balyan arrested for 'links' with gangster Do Sambhal, Ajmer show RSS chief Mohan Bhagwat's message is forgotten? Hindu Guru book that Steve Jobs read 'annually' 'Sanctity paramount': TTD prohibits political and hate speeches at Tirumala True grit: Justice Khobragade's journey from a hamlet to High Court Explore Every Corner Across The Globe WWE Survivor Series Eknath Shinde CBSE Date Sheet GDP Growth Data IPL 2025 Teams Support Staff Most uncapped players Arvind Kejriwal CSK Full Squad MI Squad Projected 11 Chennai School Holiday Tomorrow RCB Squad Projected 11 Hindu Temple Attack IPL Most Expensive Player CKS Squad Projected 11 IPL Teams Squads Elon Musk IPL All Teams Squad IPL Auction Unsold Player List PBKS IPL Team Player List IPL Auction Love Horoscope Today New Moon November 2024 St. Andrew's Day 2024 Margashirsha Amavasya 2024 Black Friday Trey Jemison Donald Trump Patrick Mahomes Margashirsha Amavasya 2024 Bank Holidays In December About us Create Your Own Ad Terms of Use and Grievance Redressal Policy Privacy policy Advertise with us RSS Newsletter Feedback ePaper Sitemap Archives FOLLOW US ON Other Times Group News Sites The Economic Times Hindi Economic Times Navbharat Times Maharashtra Times Vijaya Karnataka Telugu Samayam Tamil Samayam Malayalam Samayam I am Gujarat TimesPoints Indiatimes Brand Capital Education Times Times Food Mumbai Mirror Bangalore Mirror Hindi Podcast Popular Categories Headlines Sports News Business News India News World News Bollywood News Health+ Tips Indian TV Shows Celebrity Photos Technology News Hot on the Web Justin Bieber Malaika Arora Zarina Wahab Shah Rukh Khan Bigg Boss 18 Contestants List Viral News Kusha Kapila Aditya Pancholi Vitamin D Samantha Ruth Prabhu Top Trends Eknath Shinde IPL 2025 Sold and Unsold Player List WWE Survivor Series Sophie Rain Paul Heyman Delhi Cricket Team IPL Players Transfer IPL 2025 Full Teams Squad Maharashtra New CM Cheteshwar Pujara RCB Team Squad Matthew Hayden IPL All Teams Xi Jinping Taylor Swift Parth Jindal Deion Sanders Live Cricket Score Trending Topics Anupamaa Stars Education Qualification Samantha Ruth Prabhu Father Death Hema Malini Weight Gain Allu Arjun Amitabh Bachchan Home Dua Lipa Bigg Boss 18 Promo Bigg Boss 18 National Park Nagarjuna Kangana Ranaut Hair Fall Skincare Tips for Winter Weight Loss Tips Hair Fall iPhone 15 Pro Pan 2.0 Ufo Sighting Over Capitol Hill Living and entertainment ETimes Travel Destinations Cricbuzz.com TV Lifestyle Newspaper Subscription Food News Times Prime Whats Hot Services CouponDunia TechGig TimesJobs Bollywood News Times Mobile Gadgets Work with Us Colombia Latest News Delhi pollution: Air quality still very poor, not likely to get better soon True grit: Justice Khobragade's journey from a hamlet to High Court Kamala Harris faces criticism over post-election fundraising blitz Man attacks parents & Uncle, dies in a bid to escape police custody Uttarkashi mosque disputed, says government after calling it 'legal' AAP MLA Naresh Balyan arrested for 'links' with gangster How did Josh Allen’s family react to his engagement with Hailee Steinfeld? 'Sanctity paramount': TTD prohibits political and hate speeches at Tirumala Trump’s labour secretary pick, Lori Chavez-DeRemer, faces scrutiny over lavish campaign spending Andrew Wiggins' pregnant girlfriend Mychal Johnson shares sneak peek of her eventful Mexico Trip Every fifth road death was of a pedestrian in 2023 Activist ends fast after Uddhav Thackeray assures bigger stir for fair polls Manipur CM Biren cites 'administrative history' to take dig at Mizoram CM, MNF Tamannaah Bhatia reveals 'Aaj Ki Raat' from 'Stree 2' contributed to its commercial success: 'I find it really awkward to admit it' At Maoist commander Hidma's bastion, power now flows from electricity grid Video of Dua Lipa performing on Levitating and Woh Ladki Jo mashup at Mumbai concert go viral UK: Prince Harry and Meghan Markle excluded from royal Christmas celebrations Pet parents turn to animal whisperers to communicate with their furry friends Copyright © 2024 Bennett, Coleman & Co. Ltd. All rights reserved. For reprint rights: Times Syndication Service Do Not Sell or Share My Personal Information