Kosovo's parliament rejects new law recognising same-sex civil unions | Euronews Go to navigation Go to main content Go to search Go to footer English English Français Deutsch Italiano Español Português Polski Pусский Türkçe Ελληνικά Magyar فارسی العربية Shqip Română ქართული български Srpski BHS Newsletter Newsletters Events Events Podcasts Videos Africanews Loader Latest Trending US-Israel attack on Iran 2026 War in Ukraine Russia Pope Leo XIV Spain Ukraine Latest news No Comment Watch: mass Madrid protests over Maricarmen eviction and housing crisis No Comment Northern Ireland: 2,000 protesters block disputed Portadown march Europe News Sánchez vows housing decree amid outrage over Maricarmen eviction Europe News How neutral should Switzerland be? Voters deliver decisive verdict Europe Categories EU.XL Europe News Europe Series France United Kingdom Programmes Europe in Motion The Cube The Europe Conversation 12 minutes with Made in Europe Brussels, My Love? Euronews investigates Make it Work Smart Regions Featured Europe Today Euronews' flagship morning TV show with the news and insights that drive Europe, live from Brussels every morning at 08.00. Also available as a newsletter and podcast. The Ring The Ring is Euronews’ weekly political showdown, where Europe’s toughest debates meet their boldest voices. In each episode, two political heavyweights from across the EU face off to propose a diversity of opinions and spark conversations around the most important issues of EU affairs and the wider European political life. World Categories World Americas Middle East Africa Asia Oceania Davos Iran Greenland USA Programmes Spotlight Global Japan Euronews Witness Qatar 365 World News Euronews Debates Football Now Top News Stories Today Featured No Comment No agenda, no argument, no bias, No Comment. Get the story without commentary. EU Policy Business Categories Business Economy Markets Programmes Business Planet Energy Frontiers Focus Real Economy Start Me Up The Dialogue Target The Exchange Featured My Wildest Prediction Dare to imagine the future with business and tech visionaries The Big Question Deep dive conversations with business leaders Travel Categories Travel News Destinations Moments Residences Travel Live TV Programmes Grand Voyager Adventures Conscious Travel Explore Golf Travel Tales Notes From The Usa Soul Of The South Taste Women Beyond Borders Next Categories Tech News Money Space Work Mobility Home Artificial intelligence Programmes Dub.AI Hacker Hunter Rethink Sci-Tech Featured Euronews Tech Talks Euronews Tech Talks goes beyond discussions to explore the impact of new technologies on our lives. With explanations, engaging Q&As, and lively conversations, the podcast provides valuable insights into the intersection of technology and society. The Food Detectives Europe's best food experts are joining forces to crack down on fraud. Euronews is following them in this special series: The Food Detectives Culture Categories Culture news Style Design Art Taste Music Cinema Programmes Creators Crossing Cultures Cry Like A Boy Cult Inspire Saudi Meet The Locals Melting Pot Culture Modern Nomads Musica Scenes The Kitchen The Star Ingredient Earth Categories Earth News Nature Water EcoTech Programmes Ocean Ocean Calls The Road To Green Featured Water Matters Europe's water is under increasing pressure. Pollution, droughts, floods are taking their toll on our drinking water, lakes, rivers and coastlines. Join us on a journey around Europe to see why protecting ecosystems matters, how our wastewater can be better managed, and to discover some of the best water solutions. Video reports, an animated explainer series and live debate - find out why Water Matters, from Euronews. Climate Now We give you the latest climate facts from the world’s leading source, analyse the trends and explain how our planet is changing. We meet the experts on the front line of climate change who explore new strategies to mitigate and adapt. Health Categories Health news Healthcare Nutrition Wellbeing Programmes Smart Health Euroviews Videos More Special coverage Climate Global Japan InClassica Kazakhstan Azerbaijan Young Inventors Prize 2025 Discover Algeria Discover Türkiye Golf Travel Tales From Qatar Uzbekistan Partner content Islamic Civilization Center Be Bold. Discover Saudi Leading Edge Powering Progress Experience Brazil Italy – Heritage & Horizons Poland Untold Costa Rica Beyond Business Saadiyat Cultural District My Tokyo Kerala Tourism Dubai Global Digital Economy Hub Turkmenistan - Our story Endless Discovery Expo 2025 Osaka, Kansai, Japan Services Weather Bulletin Messaging apps Widgets & Services Online Language Courses Find Us Log In My Account Live Close menu sidebar English English Français Deutsch Italiano Español Português Polski Pусский Türkçe Ελληνικά Magyar فارسی العربية Shqip Română ქართული български Srpski BHS Latest Trending US-Israel attack on Iran 2026 War in Ukraine Russia Pope Leo XIV Spain Ukraine Latest news No Comment Watch: mass Madrid protests over Maricarmen eviction and housing crisis No Comment Northern Ireland: 2,000 protesters block disputed Portadown march Europe News Sánchez vows housing decree amid outrage over Maricarmen eviction Europe News How neutral should Switzerland be? Voters deliver decisive verdict Europe Categories EU.XL Europe News Europe Series France United Kingdom Programmes Europe in Motion The Cube The Europe Conversation 12 minutes with Made in Europe Brussels, My Love? Euronews investigates Make it Work Smart Regions Featured Europe Today Euronews' flagship morning TV show with the news and insights that drive Europe, live from Brussels every morning at 08.00. Also available as a newsletter and podcast. The Ring The Ring is Euronews’ weekly political showdown, where Europe’s toughest debates meet their boldest voices. In each episode, two political heavyweights from across the EU face off to propose a diversity of opinions and spark conversations around the most important issues of EU affairs and the wider European political life. World Categories World Americas Middle East Africa Asia Oceania Davos Iran Greenland USA Programmes Spotlight Global Japan Euronews Witness Qatar 365 World News Euronews Debates Football Now Top News Stories Today Featured No Comment No agenda, no argument, no bias, No Comment. Get the story without commentary. EU Policy Business Categories Business Economy Markets Programmes Business Planet Energy Frontiers Focus Real Economy Start Me Up The Dialogue Target The Exchange Featured My Wildest Prediction Dare to imagine the future with business and tech visionaries The Big Question Deep dive conversations with business leaders Travel Categories Travel News Destinations Moments Residences Travel Live TV Programmes Grand Voyager Adventures Conscious Travel Explore Golf Travel Tales Notes From The Usa Soul Of The South Taste Women Beyond Borders Next Categories Tech News Money Space Work Mobility Home Artificial intelligence Programmes Dub.AI Hacker Hunter Rethink Sci-Tech Featured Euronews Tech Talks Euronews Tech Talks goes beyond discussions to explore the impact of new technologies on our lives. With explanations, engaging Q&As, and lively conversations, the podcast provides valuable insights into the intersection of technology and society. The Food Detectives Europe's best food experts are joining forces to crack down on fraud. Euronews is following them in this special series: The Food Detectives Culture Categories Culture news Style Design Art Taste Music Cinema Programmes Creators Crossing Cultures Cry Like A Boy Cult Inspire Saudi Meet The Locals Melting Pot Culture Modern Nomads Musica Scenes The Kitchen The Star Ingredient Earth Categories Earth News Nature Water EcoTech Programmes Ocean Ocean Calls The Road To Green Featured Water Matters Europe's water is under increasing pressure. Pollution, droughts, floods are taking their toll on our drinking water, lakes, rivers and coastlines. Join us on a journey around Europe to see why protecting ecosystems matters, how our wastewater can be better managed, and to discover some of the best water solutions. Video reports, an animated explainer series and live debate - find out why Water Matters, from Euronews. Climate Now We give you the latest climate facts from the world’s leading source, analyse the trends and explain how our planet is changing. We meet the experts on the front line of climate change who explore new strategies to mitigate and adapt. Health Categories Health news Healthcare Nutrition Wellbeing Programmes Smart Health Euroviews Videos More Special coverage Climate Global Japan InClassica Kazakhstan Azerbaijan Young Inventors Prize 2025 Discover Algeria Discover Türkiye Golf Travel Tales From Qatar Uzbekistan Partner content Islamic Civilization Center Be Bold. Discover Saudi Leading Edge Powering Progress Experience Brazil Italy – Heritage & Horizons Poland Untold Costa Rica Beyond Business Saadiyat Cultural District My Tokyo Kerala Tourism Dubai Global Digital Economy Hub Turkmenistan - Our story Endless Discovery Expo 2025 Osaka, Kansai, Japan Services Weather Bulletin Messaging apps Widgets & Services Online Language Courses Newsletter Newsletters Events Events Podcasts Videos Africanews Loader Find Us Advertisement News World Kosovo Kosovo's parliament rejects new law recognising same-sex civil unions LGBT rights groups and supporters of the community hold banners during the country's first Gay Pride parade on Tuesday Oct. 10, 2017, in Kosovo's capital Pristina. - Copyright Credit: AP Copyright Credit: AP By AFP Published on 17/03/2022 - 15:39 GMT+1 Share Comments Add Euronews on Google Share Facebook Twitter Flipboard Send Reddit Linkedin Messenger Telegram VK Bluesky Threads Whatsapp It would have been the first time a Muslim-majority country allowed same-sex civil unions. Kosovo's parliament has rejected a new law that would allow same-sex couples to form civil partnerships. ADVERTISEMENT ADVERTISEMENT Just 28 out of 120 MPs voted in favour of the bill proposed by the government of left-wing Prime Minister Albin Kurti. Kosovo's government had been hoping to become the first Muslim-majority country to recognise same-sex unions. The proposed bill was also part of wide-ranging reforms of Kosovo's civil code, supported by the European Union. PM Kurti had urged MPs to pass the bill because "rights belong to us, they belong to everyone". But after heated debate, several MPs -- including lawmakers from Kurti's Vetevendosje -- voted against the legislation. "Only opposite-sex marriage [is] acceptable," said Labinote Demi Murtezi, "any connection beyond this combination is considered depravity and moral degeneration." Related As Chile legalises same-sex marriage, where in Europe is making the most progress on LGBT rights? Earlier this month, the EU delegation in Pristina had urged the Kosovar parliament to adopt a reform of same-sex unions, as well as other laws on minority rights and business. "Failure to adopt the civil code will have serious negative repercussions on many aspects of the lives of Kosovo's citizens and businesses, as well as on Kosovo's economic development," the delegation warned in a statement. Kosovo's independence has so far been recognised by about 100 countries, including the United States and most EU countries, but not by Serbia. Go to accessibility shortcuts Share Comments Add Euronews on Google Read more EU mission to boost police officer presence in Kosovo amid war in Ukraine Bautzen Pride goes ahead under police guard after threats Watch: Runners race in towering heels at Madrid Pride event muslim countries LGBT Same-sex marriage Gay rights Kosovo LGBTİ+ Comments ADVERTISEMENT ADVERTISEMENT Top stories IRGC claims, US denies seizure of underwater US drone in Hormuz Five arrested near US air base as police probe possible Iran link Poland and Lithuania preparing cross-border evacuation plan EU tells capitals to cut gas demand amid rising supply concerns Etna erupts again: chaos at Catania airport, risk of higher air fares ADVERTISEMENT ADVERTISEMENT Most read 1 Five arrested near US air base as police probe possible Iran link 2 Russian foreign minister rejects Berlin's call to abandon escalation 3 Fat Bear Week returns as Alaska's biggest bears compete for the crown 4 Trump rejects Iranian plan to reopen Strait of Hormuz 5 Thousands take to the streets in Madrid over Ceuta migrant crisis ADVERTISEMENT ADVERTISEMENT Loader Search Browse today's tags US-Israel attack on Iran 2026 War in Ukraine Russia Pope Leo XIV Spain Ukraine France Germany Madrid EU Policy United Kingdom Protest Themes Europe World Business EU Policy Earth Next Health Travel Culture Videos Programmes Our journalists Archive Services Live Bulletin Weather Latest Apps Messaging apps Widgets & Services Africanews Online Language Courses More About Euronews Commercial Services Terms and Conditions Cookie Policy Privacy Policy Transparency Contact Work at Euronews Accessibility: non-compliant Modify my cookies choices Follow us Newsletters Copyright © euronews 2026