BBC Homepage Skip to content Accessibility Help Your account Home News Sport Earth Reel Worklife Travel Culture Future Music TV Weather Sounds More menu More menu Search BBC Home News Sport Earth Reel Worklife Travel Culture Future Music TV Weather Sounds Close menu BBC News Menu Home Climate World UK Business Tech Science Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures More BBC Verify Newsbeat Scotland Scotland Politics Scotland Business Edinburgh, Fife & East Glasgow & West Highlands & Islands NE, Orkney & Shetland South Tayside & Central Suicide risk if trans prisoners are put in jails based on sex at birth, court told Image source, PA Media Image caption, The Scottish government is fighting a case over the housing of trans female inmates in women's prisons By Phil Sim Scotland political correspondent Published 5 February 2026 Requiring transgender prisoners to be held in jails matching their sex at birth would breach their human rights and create an unacceptable risk of suicide, a court has been told. Campaign group For Women Scotland is challenging Scottish government guidance for prisons, saying only those born biologically female should be held in the women's estate. Lawyers for the government argue the current system, based on individual risk assessments, offered necessary flexibility. They told the Court of Session in Edinburgh a strict rule of housing all trans prisoners in jails matching their biological sex would put a "straitjacket" on efforts to keep inmates safe and rehabilitate them. The case follows a Supreme Court ruling on the definition of a woman in equalities law in April last year. The Scottish government insists it respects that judgement - but said it did not override the need to uphold the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR). Woman prisoners 'treated as pawns' by Scottish government, court told Watchdogs raise concerns over transgender prisoners Published 4 February The Scottish Prison Service (SPS) uses a system of individual risk assessments which aims to keep anyone who poses a danger to women out of the female estate. However, it does allow for circumstances where trans women - born biologically male - could be housed alongside women if they are deemed not to pose an unacceptable risk to them. For Women Scotland argues the guidance flies in the face of last year's Supreme Court ruling - which found that sex should be defined in terms of biology for the purposes of the Equality Act, the UK's main anti-discrimination law. The group lodged a legal challenge saying that only those born biologically female should be held in the women's prison estate. On Tuesday, the group's KC Aidan O'Neill described the prisons policy as "Orwellian" and said it was "based on institutional neglect of and contempt for women's rights". Image source, PA Media Image caption, Co-directors of For Women Scotland (left to right) Susan Smith, Marion Calder and Trina Budge outside Parliament House in Edinburgh The Scottish government's KC, Gerry Moynihan, said the ECHR meant transgender people had the right to live their lives in their acquired gender . He added there had long been recognition in the UK that this included the right to be held in prisons aligning with that. Moynihan said separate prison estates existed because men and women are seen as having different needs and vulnerabilities - particularly in terms of rehabilitation. He said trans women also had vulnerabilities and needs, and the government's judgement was they were best dealt with in the female estate "assuming they don't pose risks to others". He said this offered them "protection against mental health difficulties and the route to rehabilitation," noting that a "trans woman will return to the community as a trans woman". Image source, PA Media Image caption, The case is being heard at the Court of Session in Edinburgh He said the government had to make "very complex, difficult judgements" around prisons policy and ministers could not run the risk of an increased risk of suicide among trans prisoners. Moynihan said: "Creating the risk of suicide of one prisoner, let alone a number, is not capable of being collateral damage. It is wholly unacceptable." He added: "What is being asked in this case is that they be put in a straitjacket. "That their best prison management judgements are constrained by an artificial parameter, that they must define a man as a man and a woman as a woman full stop, without exceptions. "Ministers are here to protect the flexibility because that is what is judged to be necessary to achieve the objectives of managing prisoners safely and in the public interest, rehabilitating them to the best of their ability." 'Fundamental challenges' On Wednesday, the court heard from two equalities groups which raised different issues with the policy. The Equalities and Human Rights Commission said the prisons guidance did not accord with the Equality Act, the UK-wide anti-discrimination law it looks after. It said the rules would effectively create mixed-sex prisons rather than separate male and female estates. It also suggested there could be a management solution rather than a legal one, by introducing "bespoke arrangements" for trans prisoners - like the specialist units used in England to house some high-risk inmates. This was rejected by the Scottish government, with Moynihan saying the number of trans prisoners in Scotland was so small that it posed "fundamental challenges". The latest figures from the SPS - dating to June 2025 - recorded a total of 19 transgender inmates, which is about 0.2% of the prison population. Moynihan said that at any point in time there was a danger that only one trans man - born biologically female - would be housed in the unit, effectively making it a form of solitary confinement. He also said there was a "transport problem", in that there would likely only need to be one unit - meaning that a prisoner from Inverness might need to be sent to prison in Glasgow, rather than being held closer to home. Image source, PA Media Image caption, For Women Scotland is challenging the current guidance in place in Scottish prisons Meanwhile the Scottish Human Rights Commission said it did not have an issue with a system of individual risk assessments - but raised concerns about how the current one is drafted. The group said there was no specific reference to the rights of women prisoners or female prison staff, alongside those of trans inmates, or guidance about how to balance those rights. KC Kenny McBrearty said the group was concerned that the rules could end up being applied in a way that is "not compliant with human rights". O'Neill told the court on Tuesday that there was "incredible sensitivity" to the rights, dignity and privacy of trans people, while the rights of "incredibly vulnerable" female prisoners were not factored in. He said the government wanted to retain the flexibility to put "a totally non-violent trans-identifying man" in the women's estate but questioned why female prisoners had to "bear the risk" of this and act as "human shields". O'Neill continued: "What is required is the preservation of women's only spaces. "All I am interested in, because of the situation of women, is the preservation of women's dignity, security and sense of safety vis a vis men - that's all." Related topics Women's rights LGBT Transgender people Scotland Prisons Scottish government More on this story 'Blanket rule' for trans prisoners would violate rights, ministers to argue Published 20 January What is the transgender prisoners row all about? Published 28 February 2023 The video playlist Watch our pick of standout clips from across the BBC Previous Next 1:09 What are the charges against Man City? 00:01:09, play video What are the charges against Man City? 0:35 Rory Stewart on his viral Newsnight moment. 00:00:35, play video Rory Stewart on his viral Newsnight moment 1:37 Question Time panel clash over welfare policy. 00:01:37, play video Question Time panel clash over welfare policy 1:06 BBC boss warns some channels and radio stations may close. 00:01:06, play video BBC boss warns some channels and radio stations may close 0:49 Greece urges UK to return Parthenon sculptures. 00:00:49, play video Greece urges UK to return Parthenon sculptures 0:43 What was on the menu at the White House state dinner? 00:00:43, play video What was on the menu at the White House state dinner? 1:02 How we know this is an altered photo. 00:01:02, play video How we know this is an altered photo 0:47 Why Gen-Z are ditching cardio for weights. 00:00:47, play video Why Gen-Z are ditching cardio for weights 1:09 Why has half of this house disappeared? 00:01:09, play video Why has half of this house disappeared? 1:15 FA Cup assistant ref says tumours ended his career. 00:01:15, play video FA Cup assistant ref says tumours ended his career 0:57 Inside the Trump-Xi White House dinner. 00:00:57, play video Inside the Trump-Xi White House dinner 1:09 Would you chase a friend for £5? 00:01:09, play video Would you chase a friend for £5? 1:09 No advantage for 'nepo-babies': Zeta-Jones. 00:01:09, play video No advantage for 'nepo-babies': Zeta-Jones 0:52 A rapid new test to help brain tumour patients. 00:00:52, play video A rapid new test to help brain tumour patients 1:04 New GCSE subjects for teens in England. 00:01:04, play video New GCSE subjects for teens in England 1:10 Protests over eviction of 87-year-old. 00:01:10, play video Protests over eviction of 87-year-old 2:09 'My partner raped me while I was sleeping' 00:02:09, play video 'My partner raped me while I was sleeping' 1:00 Police warn of rise in vape spiking. 00:01:00, play video Police warn of rise in vape spiking 1:21 'Miracle' device easing teens Tourette symptoms. 00:01:21, play video 'Miracle' device easing teens Tourette symptoms 1:20 Children found to have ketamine bladder damage. 00:01:20, play video Children found to have ketamine bladder damage Top stories Man City found guilty of breaking financial rules Published 11 minutes ago What could the potential sanctions for Man City be? Published 5 hours ago I'm not tempted to call an early election, Burnham says Published 3 hours ago More to explore Just how hot and dry was your summer? Use our postcode lookup to find out Treadmills to deadlifts: Why Gen Z are swapping cardio for strength training From weeks to hours - the rapid new test transforming brain tumour diagnosis What are my children exposed to? Why I want testing for cancer-causing chemicals From Nagaland to a path to the Oscars: Indian film brings a rarely seen world to global cinema 'We're all broke': Would you chase a friend for £5? Why Trump gave Xi an ornate bald eagle statue at the state dinner Ministers reject dog ownership licence scheme New policies, election speculation: What to expect from Burnham's first Labour conference as PM Elsewhere on the BBC Anne Hathaway and Jessica Chastain star in a psychological thriller How many dead people are on the internet? The hit podcast explores Thomas More's iconic text 'Utopia' Was Colin Norris wrongly convicted of killing his patients? Most read 1 British climber dies after falling 60m on Spanish mountainside 2 Daniel Thomas pleads not guilty after dinghy slashed 3 U2 celebrate 50th anniversary at the school where they formed 4 Trump's plans for massive arch move ahead 5 Some BBC channels and radio stations may well have to close, director general says 6 Noah Woods left playground through gap in fence, inquest hears 7 I'm not tempted to call an early election, Burnham says 8 'Heartbreaking': The man set to lose his home due to the UK's £5bn theme park 9 Students strike across Germany in protest against military service 10 How 'largest phone smuggling network' was uncovered BBC News Services On your mobile On smart speakers Get news alerts Contact BBC News Home News Sport Earth Reel Worklife Travel Culture Future Music TV Weather Sounds Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Careers BBC emails for you Advertise with us Copyright © 2026 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.