When Laws Fail to Protect Trans People, Harmful Medicalized Norms Creep In | Human Rights Watch Skip to cookie privacy notice Skip to main content العربية 简中 繁中 English Français Deutsch 日本語 Português Русский Español More languages Search Donate Now Countries Topics Reports Videos & Photos Impact About Join Us Give Now Close Search Search Primary navigation Countries Africa All Africa African Union Angola Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Central African Republic Chad Côte d'Ivoire Democratic Republic of Congo Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini (formerly Swaziland) Ethiopia Gambia Ghana Guinea Kenya Liberia Malawi Mali Mauritius Mozambique Niger Nigeria Rwanda Senegal Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Americas All Americas Argentina Bolivia Brazil Canada Chile Colombia Costa Rica Cuba Dominican Republic Ecuador El Salvador Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Uruguay Venezuela Asia All Asia Afghanistan Australia Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China and Tibet Fiji India Indonesia Japan Laos Malaysia Maldives Myanmar (Burma) Nauru Nepal North Korea Pakistan Papua New Guinea Philippines Singapore South Korea Sri Lanka Taiwan Thailand Timor-Leste Vietnam Europe/Central Asia All Europe/Central Asia Albania Armenia Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czech Republic Denmark European Union France Georgia Germany Greece Holy See Hungary Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Latvia Lithuania Netherlands Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia Serbia/Kosovo Spain Sweden Switzerland Tajikistan Türkiye Turkmenistan Ukraine United Kingdom Uzbekistan Middle East/North Africa All Middle East/North Africa Algeria Bahrain Egypt Iran Iraq Israel/Palestine Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Libya Mauritania Morocco/Western Sahara Oman Qatar Saudi Arabia Syria Tunisia United Arab Emirates Yemen United States All United States Criminal Justice Democracy Economic Justice Immigrants’ Rights and Border Policy Racial Justice US Foreign Policy Topics Arms Cluster Munitions Killer Robots Landmines Explosive Weapons in Populated Areas Incendiary Weapons Children's Rights Education Attacks on Education Children Separated from Families Children and Armed Conflict Child Labor Youth Justice Migrant and Refugee Children Intersex Children Crisis and Conflict Disability Rights Shackling Economic Justice and Rights Corporate Accountability Poverty and Inequality Environment and Human Rights Climate Change Deforestation Fossil Fuels Free Speech Press Freedom Religious Freedom Health Sexual and Reproductive Health Detention Centers Disasters and Displaced Populations Environment and Health Health Care Access HIV/AIDS and Tuberculosis Palliative Care Attacks on Health LGBT Rights Refugees and Migrants Asylum Seekers Internally Displaced People Exploitation, Forced Labor & Trafficking Rights of Older People International Justice International Criminal Court Peace and Justice Sport and Human Rights Technology and Rights Digital Investigations Lab Terrorism / Counterterrorism CIA Activities Detention without Trial Edward Snowden Guantanamo Guantanamo - Military Commissions Targeted Killings and Drones Torture United Nations Human Rights Council Women's Rights Forced Marriage Gender Based Violence Domestic Workers Gender Equality Reproductive Rights Sexual Violence Labor Rights Sex Work Women and Armed Conflict Women’s Health Reports Video & Photos Impact Join Us Newsletters Our Committees Film Festival Legacies for Justice About About Us History Newsletters Careers People Board of Directors Advisory Committees Social Media Human Rights Education Partners Partner Resources Financials and Fundraising Policy Accessibility Contact Give Now Make a One-time Gift Give Monthly Gifts in Wills and Trusts Matching Gifts Partners for Justice Stock or Wire Transfer Give from Your IRA Donate Now Search Search English Choose your language Close العربية 简中 繁中 English Français Deutsch 日本語 Português Русский Español More Languages Donate Now Open the main menu Trending Russia-Ukraine War Israel/Palestine Trump Administration and Human Rights Crisis in the Middle East International Criminal Court Would you like to see a version of this page that loads faster by showing text only? Yes No, don't ask again ✕ Close Human Rights Watch When Laws Fail to Protect Trans People, Harmful Medicalized Norms Creep In Print Donate Now May 15, 2024 3:00PM EDT | Commentary When Laws Fail to Protect Trans People, Harmful Medicalized Norms Creep In Published in: Advocate Kyle Knight Former Associate Director, Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Rights Program Share this via Facebook Share this via Bluesky Share this via X Share this via WhatsApp Share this via Email More sharing options Share this via LinkedIn Share this via Reddit Share this via Telegram Share this via Printer Click to expand Image Bhumika Shrestha, a transgender woman in Kathmandu, Nepal, holds her citizenship certificate in 2023, which lists her name, current photo, and female gender. © 2023 Laxman Adhikari Earlier this year, Germany became the world’s latest country to pass a clear law that allows transgender people to change their legal gender to reflect their identity based on self-declaration. A number of other countries are staggering toward this goal; in some, policies allow self-identification for some documents and not others. But the majority of the world’s governments still either disallow changes in legal gender recognition altogether, or have laws that require trans people to undergo medical intervention to access their rights. Such policy environments fails to benefit transgender people or government. Instead, it reflects a default to medical authority, perpetuating outdated and discriminatory practices. Policymakers should recognize and address the harmful consequences of medicalized gender transition procedures. While medical intervention is essential for some individuals, it should not serve as a prerequisite for legal gender change. Laws and procedures should clearly separate legal recognition from medical requirements, ensuring that people can assert their gender identity without undue barriers or intrusions into their privacy and dignity. Most laws that currently require medical intervention and verifications are decades old. But there is also contemporary creep. The current debates raging—in particular in the UK and the US—over trans youth health care, demonstrate how fearmongering over the evidence-based interventions trans people want, can perversely reinvigorate harmful pathologizing ideas. In other contexts where legal progress initially seemed promising, the lack of genuine de-pathologization through legal protections has allowed harmful medical norms to creep in and cause problems. One such setting is Nepal, where following a 2007 Supreme Court order, authorities have been issuing some documents listing gender as “other” or “third gender” for over a decade, on the basis of the person’s self-declaration. However, despite the court order, the lack of a clear central policy, and confusion and ambiguity around the implementation of the court’s standard of “self-feeling,” creates problems. Trans people in Nepal today who want to change their gender markers to “female” or “male” are typically forced to undergo surgery, which requires traveling outside the country, and then in-country medical assessments, including invasive examinations of post-operative genitals. The reliance on regressive medical norms adds unnecessary burdens and risks during crises. In Ukraine, legal gender recognition requires people who wish to change their legal gender to obtain, among other criteria, a diagnosis of “transsexualism,” even though the term was removed from international diagnostic manuals years ago. To get the diagnosis, transgender people must undergo a two-year outpatient psychiatric evaluation. However in 2022, Russia’s full-scale invasion led to martial law, under which all men of military age — between 18 and 64 — are barred from leaving the country. This posed a range of challenges, though particularly for trans women who were either in the middle of the lengthy medicalized process, or who had opted to not undergo the assessments, and nonetheless live their lives as women. They found themselves still legally male, and stuck in a war zone. Activist groups – particularly those run by lesbians, who could cross in and out of Ukraine from neighboring countries freely – became critical sources of support for trans women in Ukraine. They helped them get assessed based on the medical requirements, obtain a diagnosis, and then undergo an often-humiliating confirmation at a Military Medical Commission, which would allow them to cross the border to safety. In both Nepal and Ukraine, incomplete legal reforms left behind a murky medicalization of legal gender recognition. A trans woman in Kathmandu told me, “The government, when confused and under pressure, just defaults to medicalization because it’s perceived as neutral and prestigious. And if a doctor says I’m a woman, then the state can just shrug.” A Ukrainian activist working in Slovakia to help trans people exit during the war told me that in Ukraine, “The Military Medical Commission is open 8 a.m.-8 p.m., there is at any time 1,000 or more people there waiting…and then the room where you get checked is very intimidating – miliary men doubting you and questioning you.” Medical intervention for trans people, like all others, should be undertaken based on individual informed consent. None of the medical interventions associated with transitioning should be prerequisites for legal gender change, and laws play an important role in making this separation clear. Without that clarity, medical requirements are unfairly used as validation tools. As the cases of Nepal and Ukraine show, de-pathologizing legal processes for trans people is a critical, lifesaving step, and requires sturdy and comprehensive legal protections to prevent medicalized harm from creeping back in. This essay is part of a series marking the 20th anniversary of the LGBT rights program at Human Rights Watch. The collection of articles explores the multifaceted challenges LGBT people face globally. Find them here . Your tax deductible gift can help stop human rights violations and save lives around the world. $50 $100 $250 $500 $1000 Other $ Donate Now Topic Health LGBT Rights More Reading September 16, 2026 Dispatches Reforms to Hungary's Anti-LGBT Laws Welcome, but More to Do August 27, 2026 News Release Ecuador: New Adoption Law Entrenches Bias Reports November 2, 2025 Report “No Money, No Care” Obstetric Violence in Sierra Leone June 3, 2025 Report “They’re Ruining People’s Lives” Bans on Gender-Affirming Care for Transgender Youth in the US More Reading September 16, 2026 Dispatches Reforms to Hungary's Anti-LGBT Laws Welcome, but More to Do August 27, 2026 News Release Ecuador: New Adoption Law Entrenches Bias Most Viewed January 15, 2026 Report Syria: Accountability Lacking for Sweida Abuses June 14, 2018 News Release Africa: Pregnant Girls, Young Mothers Barred from School September 8, 2016 News Release Nepal: Child Marriage Threatens Girls’ Futures May 17, 2021 Report “Years Don’t Wait for Them” September 27, 2026 Report Syria: Reconstruction Deals Lack Critical Rights Framework Share this via Facebook Share this via Bluesky Share this via X Share this via WhatsApp Share this via Email More sharing options Share this via LinkedIn Share this via Reddit Share this via Telegram Share this via Printer Protecting Rights, Saving Lives Human Rights Watch defends the rights of people in close to 100 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justice Donate Now Get updates on human rights issues from around the globe. Join our movement today. Enter an email address Leave blank Leave blank Leave blank Processing.. Thank you for signing up! An error occurred while subscribing your email address. Please try again. Get Updates On Rights Issues Worldwide Leave blank Leave blank Leave blank Sign Up Connect With Us BlueSky X Facebook YouTube Instagram LinkedIn TikTok Footer menu Contact Us Corrections Privacy Policy Permissions Site Map Child Safeguarding Text Version © 2026 Human Rights Watch Human Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700 Human Rights Watch is a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808 Human Rights Watch