Theresa May urged to advocate for LGBT people in Qatar during Emir's visit | PinkNews About Us Advertise Work with us Login Register Latest News View all UK US World Health Politics Sport Business Culture View all TV Film Celebrity Drag Theatre Music Gaming Lifestyle View all Beauty Careers Fashion Relationships Travel Shopping View all Deals Recommended Fashion & Beauty Tickets Video View all News & Politics Entertainment Lifestyle Discover Trans Awareness Week Drag Race Explainers The Queer Agenda Toggle menu Account Register Login UK Theresa May urged to advocate for LGBT people in Qatar during Emir’s visit Jul 20 2018 Written by Sofia Lotto Persio Share Save for later Comment Prime Minister Theresa May greets His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad al Thani, The Emir of Qatar outside 10 Downing Street on September 15, 2016 in London, England. (Dan Kitwood/Getty) EXCLUSIVE: The Emir of Qatar Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al-Thani is visiting London on Monday to discuss trade relations with the UK, but critics of the Qatari government’s record on human rights hope Prime Minister Theresa May will not forget to raise that issue, too. The emir will meet the Lord Mayor of London Charles Bowman and the Minister of State for Trade and Export Promotion Baroness Fairhead for a lunchtime meeting at Guildhall. It remains unclear when he’ll see the prime minister, but Downing Street is due to make an announcement on Monday, PinkNews understands. The meeting would provide May with an opportunity to present herself as an “ally of the LGBT community in the UK”—as she said in a recent interview to ITV —and push for the decriminalisation of homosexuality in Qatar, one of the 74 countries that still punishes same-sex relations with imprisonment. The world’s attention has focused more on Qatar’s human rights record in recent years as it will host the 2022 football World Cup. British Prime Minister Theresa May greets His Highness Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad al Thani, The Emir of Qatar outside 10 Downing Street on September 15, 2016 in London, England (Photo by Dan Kitwood/Getty) “Since becoming host nation for the 2022 World Cup, Qatar’s extremely poor human rights record has been in the international spotlight—from its widespread exploitation of migrant workers to restrictions on free speech. UK ministers and officials should see the visit as an opportunity to encourage much-needed human rights reform in Qatar, not least the decriminalisation of same-sex relations,” Allan Hogarth, Amnesty International UK’s head of policy and government affairs, tells PinkNews. After awarding Qatar the World Cup, the since disgraced FIFA president Sepp Blatter said, apparently joking, that LGBT+ football fans should “refrain from any sexual activities,” as the BBC reported in 2010 . Three years later, the head of Qatar’s World Cup bid team, Hassan al-Thawadi, said that everybody was welcome at the event, so long as they refrained from public display of affection. “Public display of affection is not part of our culture and tradition” he said . Emir of Qatar Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al-Thani, FIFA President Gianni Infantino and Russian President Vladimir Putin pose for a photography during a symbolic transfer of the authority to Qatar to host the World Cup 2022 at the Kremlin in Moscow on July 15, 2018 (Photo by Yuri Kadobnov/AFP/Getty) Homosexuality remains a taboo topic in the country, as the outlet Doha News discovered in 2016, when they published an opinion piece in which the author described being gay in Qatar as “jarring” and spoke of the “irreparable damage to [his] mental health.” The piece was met with extremely strong reactions . Andy Harvey, a lecturer in Sports and Exercise Science at Swansea University, who recently wrote about how the World Cup in Qatar will be even worse than the one in Russia for LGBT+ people , said that pressure from other world leaders could prove effective in delivering significant changes to legislation in the country. “It’s an opportunity for world leaders like May to stress to the Qatari authorities that it would be unacceptable for them to hold a World Cup whilst not respecting human rights, including LGBT+ rights. And these should not be respected only for the duration of the World Cup like we’ve seen in Russia—the Russian authorities have put on a very good PR display, but of course nothing has changed in the country,” Harvey tells PinkNews. “We need to see in advance of Qatar hosting the World Cup significant changes in relation to LGBT+ right, decriminalising gay sex. We need to see those laws repealed in advance of the world cup, not just tolerate LGBT fans during the world cup,” he adds. More: LGBT rights Middle East Qatar Qatar Theresa May World Cup Queer News. Straight Up. The LGBTQ+ stories you don’t want to miss, delivered to your inbox daily. Email address required Must be valid email Register By registering you agree to our Privacy Policy Thanks for registering! You can update your email subscriptions at any time in the My profile section of your account. Dec 05 2022 26 LGBTQ+ couples we were rooting for but whose break-ups really, really hurt Related articles Sport Oct 12 2023 Alex Scott: BBC ‘didn’t know’ about Qatar OneLove armband decision Sport Dec 10 2022 Journalist and LGBTQ+ advocate dies at Qatar World Cup. His brother says he was killed Sport Dec 01 2022 England fan strip searched for wearing Pride t-shirt at Qatar World Cup match Sport Nov 30 2022 World Cup pitch invader banned from all future Qatar matches after brave Pride flag stunt Sport Nov 30 2022 Gay sport minister proudly wears OneLove armband at Qatar World Cup, as promised Latest News Previous Next Celebrity Sep 25 Trans influencer calls out Nikki Glaser for stand-up joke about what’s ‘in her pants’ Culture Sep 25 Trans pro wrestling trailblazer Gisele Shaw signs exclusive NWA contract Bisexual Sep 25 The Traitors star Freddie Fraser’s mum’s emotional response to his coming out Celebrity Sep 25 Lili Reinhart says Hollywood ‘too afraid’ to greenlight lesbian vampire project Celebrity Sep 25 Carly Rae Jepsen describes moment Heated Rivalry inspired her son’s name Celebrity Sep 25 John Green ‘heartbroken’ for trans Harry Potter fans as he talks JK Rowling Current Affairs Sep 25 JD Vance claims James Talarico has a “weird obsession with children in drag” News Sep 25 Susan Sarandon, Hannah Einbinder and Caleb Hearon detained outside UN after protesting Netanyahu What to buy now Previous Next Fashion Mar 27 Connor Ives and MAC team up to re-release the iconic ‘Protect The Dolls’ t-shirt Music Mar 12 The Pussycat Dolls confirm reunion with new single and tour – how to get tickets Music Jan 23 A full guide to the 2026 Harry Styles Together, Together tour including dates and presale info Shopping Nov 24 2025 Ten truly awesome Christmas gifts you can buy to support queer-owned businesses Trans Sep 09 2025 Lush creates ‘luxurious’ trans flag bath bomb to support trans charities Tickets Jun 25 2025 Dolly Parton announces mini Las Vegas residency after wrapping her last tour almost a decade ago Shopping May 15 2025 LEGO celebrates late gay icon Keith Haring with new art set: ‘Want this so bad’ Music Apr 18 2025 Primavera Sound’s most iconic queer performances, from Troye Sivan to Ethel Cain Exclusive Previous Next Exclusive Sep 11 Ania Magliano talks SNL UK season two and anti-LGBTQ voices in comedy: ‘We do edgy in the right way’ Exclusive Sep 11 Elliot Tuttle on Blue Film’s personal inspiration, rejection and taboo: ‘It’s about loneliness’ Exclusive Sep 09 OF star Andy Lee on love for gay fans, ‘poisonous’ creators and ‘harmful’ stunts: ‘Gay men lift me up every day’ Exclusive Sep 07 Real Housewives of London spill the tea: ‘She’d go to the opening of a packet of crisps’ Opinion Sep 04 Katseye in London: A showcase of real talent deserving of the deafening screams Exclusive Sep 02 Adrian Chiarella and Joe Bird on tackling conversion therapy in gay horror Leviticus Exclusive Aug 21 Sziget Festival drag and circus troupe want audiences to feel like family Exclusive Aug 20 Gay wrestler Anthony Bowens says Heated Rivalry shows authentic life of closeted athletes Register to save articles and more. It'll only take a minute and it's free. JOIN US TODAY! Already have an account? Log in here "/> Download the PinkNews app Award winning LGBTQ+ journalism About us Editorial Policy Contact us Advertise Work for us Terms and conditions Privacy policy Privacy manager Privacy Manager