Wallis and Futuna Islands COI – Rights in Exile Home About AsyLex Collaborative Approach AsyLex’s International Litigation – Best Practice Resources For Refugees Legal Assistance by Country Self-Help Kits Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Information by Country For Legal Advisors Legal Assistance by Country Country of Origin Information Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Information by Country Case Law Databases Special Issues International Legal Instruments related to Refugee Law International and Regional Human Rights Bodies and Courts RSD-Specific Resources Support AsyLex Our Partnership Model – Law Firms & Corporate Contact Us Donate Now Wallis and Futuna Islands COI Home Country of Origin Information Wallis and Futuna Islands COI Wallis and Futuna Islands COI On this page, you will find: a list of experts providing Country of Origin Information for Wallis and Futuna Islands a list of resources providing Country of Origin Information for Wallis and Futuna Islands To find organisations working for LGBTQI+ rights, visit our Wallis and Futuna Islands LGBTQI+ Resources page. To find organisations providing legal or other types of assistance to refugees in Wallis and Futuna Islands, visit our Wallis and Futuna Islands Legal Assistance page . COI Experts We have not yet identified COI experts for Wallis and Futuna Islands. If you have any suggestions, please get in touch . COI Resources We have not yet identified any COI resources for Wallis and Futuna Islands. If you have any suggestions, please get in touch . Wallis and Futuna Islands Legal Assistance Find organisations offering legal and other types of assistance to refugees in Wallis and Futuna Islands. VISIT THE PAGE Wallis and Futuna Islands LGBTQI+ Resources Find organisations working for refugee LGBTQI+ rights in Wallis and Futuna Islands. VISIT THE PAGE We are always looking to expand the resources on our platform. If you know about relevant experts, or you are aware of organisations and/or resources to include in our directories, please get in touch . Last updated May 2023 Previous Pro Bono Western Sahara COI Next Pro Bono Vietnam COI Contact us rightsinexile@asylex.org Copyright 2024 © Asylex Global. All Rights Reserved. Design by SMART Privacy Policy