Fiji | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Fiji At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? No Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? No Legal Gender Recognition Possible? No LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? No Last Update: March 12, 2026 Fiji has made progress on LGBTIQ equality in the last decade. However, LGBTIQ people still face barriers to full equality. Same-sex relations were decriminalized in 2010, and Fiji is one of the few countries in the world to ban discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity in its constitution. The protection based on sexual orientation was first enshrined in the 1997 Constitution of Fiji, making the country one of the first in the world to do so, alongside South Africa. The current 2013 constitution reinstated and expanded these protections to cover gender expression and identity. Fiji also enacted legal protections from discrimination based on sexual orientation in the workplace in 2007 and prohibits health professionals from attempting to change a person’s sexual orientation. Fiji has a traditional third-gender population known as vaka sa lewa lewa, who present themselves and/or identify as women, but there is no procedure for legal gender recognition in the country. Fiji does not legally recognize same-sex marriage or civil unions. The Marriage Act, amended in 2002, expressly defines marriage as the voluntary union of one man and one woman. The bodily autonomy of intersex people is not legally protected in Fiji. The status of intersex infant surgery in Fiji is unknown , meaning there is no confirmed ban on nonconsensual, medically unnecessary surgeries performed on intersex children, and no specific legal framework protecting intersex people from such interventions. There have been several notable cases of anti-LGBTIQ violence. In April 2024, a 19-year-old trans woman, Esther Ravuto, died several weeks after experiencing a violent assault. Three months later, in July 2024, the Human Rights and Anti-Discrimination Commission in the country filed a complaint before both the Fiji Police Force and the Online Safety Commission, calling for investigations following the death by suicide of a queer individual who faced online gender-based violence. In September 2025, the death of Dr. Leighley Leli Darling, a trans woman who was a medical doctor and popular social media influencer, sparked a national discussion on transphobia in Fiji. A 32-year-old man was charged with her alleged murder after she was found with multiple injuries at her home near Nadi, with the matter transferred to the Lautoka High Court. Her death sparked widespread fear and insecurity among sexual and gender minorities in Fiji. In early 2026, the government instituted a new Constitutional Review Commission to recommend amendments to Fiji’s constitution. Activists expressed concern to Outright that conservative forces in the current government could jeopardize existing constitutional protections. The deputy prime minister previously described same-sex marriage as an “abomination.” View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International