DUP accused of stalling trans hate crime protections Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Home News US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business World of Business Technology of Business NYSE Opening Bell Technology Artificial Intelligence Intelligence Revolution AI v the Mind Tech Now Health Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList To the Ends of the Earth Earth Science Natural Wonders Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcast Categories Radio Audio FAQs Video BBC Maestro Discover the World Live Live News Live Sport Site search Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters DUP accused of stalling trans hate crime protections 14 December 2025 Share Save Add as preferred on Google Jayne McCormack Political correspondent, BBC News NI Getty Images The Democratic Unionist Party has been accused of stalling plans by Stormont's justice minister to include transgender people as a "protected" group in new hate crime legislation for Northern Ireland. Naomi Long wrote to other executive parties at the start of November seeking approval for the move. In her letter, seen by BBC News NI, she said she wanted to "provide equality" by including the measure as part of a bill aimed at changing sentencing laws. The Democratic Unionist Party (DUP) said it could only come to a view on an issue "upon the submission of a formal paper containing the relevant proposals". A party spokesperson added that its ministers "carefully consider all executive papers and as part of the confidential executive process seek further clarification and information in coming to a view on any paper". The minister's letter said transgender identity was already a protected characteristic in hate crime legislation in other parts of the UK and Ireland. Existing protected groups are race, sexual orientation, religion and disability. DUP assembly member Trevor Clarke said the party could only make an "informed decision" once a formal paper with recommendations was sent to the executive. "All we have is a reference to a letter that has been written to the departments," he told the Sunday Politics show. Alliance assembly member John Blair told the show that he thought the DUP was out to block it "as they have form on this issue". Other executive parties in support of proposal It is understood Sinn Féin and the Ulster Unionist Party told the minister they would support her proposal, but the DUP did not respond to Long's letter by her requested deadline of mid-November. The bill first got executive agreement in December 2024, but Long needs approval from executive parties for all of its draft contents before it can be introduced to the assembly. It is understood the first and deputy first ministers also wrote to Long last month, saying that any "additional provisions" would require executive agreement in the "normal way", via a paper to the executive with formal recommendations. A Stormont source said: "It is encouraging that most parties around the executive table are backing the protection of trans people, but the DUP aren't engaging and our system of government gives them a unilateral blocking power over the progress of these proposals. "The DUP seem to once again be happy with a border in the Irish Sea when it comes to progress on social issues in Northern Ireland." PA Media Naomi Long wrote to other executive parties at the start of November seeking approval for the move In Long's letter, she said the measure would "increase protection for transgender people who have been subjected to hate crime... and provide parity of protection against hate crime across the LGBTQI+ community". She cited Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI) statistics that said there had been "close to 100" transgender identity incidents or hate crimes between July 2024 and June 2025, and that there was likely to be an "underreporting" of the true prevalence. "There is clear evidence that transgender persons require protection in law based on the evidence collated by the PSNI on hate crimes and hate incidents relating to those who are transgender," the letter added. She went on to say that she appreciated the consideration of protection for transgender people comes at a time when trans identity is " the focus of ongoing public and political debate". It comes after a Supreme Court ruling earlier this year that said a woman is defined in law by biological sex . The ruling had significant implications for single-sex spaces in Great Britain, such as female changing rooms and toilets. The court had been asked to decide on the proper interpretation of the 2010 Equality Act, which applies across Great Britain but not in Northern Ireland. Long said that hate crime was a criminal offence separate from equality law and that therefore, she believed it was important to "address the gap" in providing protection for victims of transgender hate crime. The proposed sentencing bill, would, among other things, impose tougher sentences on people who cause death by dangerous driving. Long said it would also introduce hate crime provisions that would modernise current laws and provide greater protections for all victims. Her bill comes five years after a judge carried out an independent review of hate crime legislation. At the time, Desmond Marrinan recommended that Northern Ireland should treat all crimes with an age or gender-based motive as hate crimes , including those against transgender people. Hate crime Northern Ireland Naomi Long DUP (Democratic Unionist Party) LGBT Transgender people Northern Ireland Executive Related New hate crime reporting hubs in mosques will 'remove barriers' Fear and anxiety amid rise in religious hate crime Jewish community in harder position than immediately after synagogue attack, says rabbi More from the BBC Just now Protesters blocking Garvaghy Road ahead of Orange Order march Orangemen are waiting in a hall at Drumcree Church, about a mile away from the protest, for the go-ahead from police to proceed. Just now 5 hrs ago Ghosts of Drumcree wakened as questions loom over Stormont's future We are again reminded of the unfinished business of that peace and of roads yet to travel, writes Brian Rowan. 5 hrs ago 7 hrs ago Orange Order march row goes to heart of ongoing divisions in Northern Ireland The dispute over the controversial parade is a reminder that the peace process is not over. 7 hrs ago 8 hrs ago Yellow rainfall warning for parts of Northern Ireland The Met Office yellow alert, which lasted until 14:00 BST, warned of intense rainfall before conditions improved. 8 hrs ago 9 hrs ago Theft of church Pride banner reported as hate crime The vicar of St Mark's Church in Sheffield says it is not the first time such items have been taken. 9 hrs ago British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages The BBC is in multiple languages Read the BBC In your own language BBC News Brasil BBC News Mundo (Spanish) BBC News မြန်မာ (Burmese) BBC News 中文 (Chinese) BBC News Indonesia BBC News 코리아 (Korean) BBC News ไทย (Thai) BBC News Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese) BBC News Azərbaycanca (Azeri) BBC News Magyarul (Hungarian) BBC News Кыргыз Кызматы (Kyrgyz) BBC News Polska (Polish) BBC News România (Romanian) BBC News Русская служба (Russian) BBC News na srpskom (Serbian) BBC News Україна (Ukrainian) BBC News O'zbek (Uzbek) BBC News عربي (Arabic) BBC News فارسی (Persian) BBC News Türkçe (Turkish) BBC News বাংলা (Bengali) BBC News دری (Dari) BBC News ગુજરાતી (Gujarati) BBC News हिन्दी (Hindi) BBC News मराठी (Marathi) BBC News नेपाली (Nepali) BBC News සිංහල (Sinhala) BBC News ਪੰਜਾਬੀ (Punjabi) BBC News Afaan Oromoo BBC News አማርኛ (Amharic) BBC News Afrique (French) BBC News Hausa BBC News Gaelic NAIDHEACHDAN BBC News Ìgbò BBC News Japanese 日本語 BBC News Gahuza BBC News Pidgin BBC News Somali BBC News Swahili BBC News தமிழ் (Tamil) BBC News తెలుగు (Telugu) BBC News ትግርኛ (Tigrinya) BBC News اردو (Urdu) BBC News Yorùbá BBC News World Service Follow BBC on: Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Do not share or sell my info Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us BBC.com Help & FAQs Content Index Set Preferred Source Copyright 2026 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.