Catholic bishop in Dominica: End anti-homosexuality laws Now Reading Catholic bishop in Dominica: End anti-homosexuality laws Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate Catholic bishop in Dominica: End anti-homosexuality laws by Colin Stewart May 24, 2013 Colin Stewart Colin Stewart is a 45-year journalism veteran living in Southern… Read Next Signs of Caribbean progress for Catholics, LGBT rights Bishop Gabriel Malzaire Bishop Gabriel Malzaire, the head of the Roman Catholic Church in Dominica, has called for the elimination of criminal penalties for homosexuality and an end to “all forms of violence” against LGBT people. Malzaire’s position, he stated in a Dominica News commentary, is consistent with the Catholic Church’s overall position: I wish to make it clear that the Catholic Church in Dominica adheres to the call of the Holy See in its statement to the 63rd session of the General Assembly of the United Nations on the Declaration of Human Rights, sexual orientation and gender identity, “to condemn all forms of violence against homosexual persons as well as to urge all States to take necessary measures to put an end to all criminal penalties against them. …” The Catholic Church maintains that free sexual acts between adult persons must not be treated as crimes to be punished by civil authorities. Dominica is one of several Caribbean countries where homosexual activity is a criminal offense. The anti-homosexuality law provides for prison sentences of up to 10 years for consensual same-sex relations. Malzaire’s statement came in response to a statement by the LGBT rights group Minority Rights Dominica, which complained that the church had not made its position clear about that law. See Also Haiti’s wary LGBT+ activists brace for first elections in 10 years Two men on a gay cruise were arrested in Dominica in March 2012 after police were told they were seen engaging in sex on board their cruise ship. They were released after pleading guilty to indecent exposure. Malzaire emphasized his support of other Roman Catholic doctrines such as opposition to (though not criminalization of): Same-sex marriage. Adoption of children by same-sex couples. Homosexual activity. Malzaire said that, “according to Holy Scriptures, [it] is among many wrongs which, if not controlled, can lead to spiritual death. Among these are adultery, fornication, orgies, calumny, deep seated hatred, and the like (cf. Rom 13:13; Gal 5:16-21).” The use of the phrase “sexual orientation and gender identity.” Malzaire said regarding the U.N. Declaration of Human Rights, “The Vatican specifically objected to the declaration’s use of the term sexual orientation and gender identity, which it said had no established meaning in international law.” For more information, read his full commentary: “Decriminalization of homosexuality – what it means for the Catholic Church in Dominica.” Related articles Group wants Catholic Church to address anti-buggery laws (dominicanewsonline.com) Catholic Church now supports sodomy laws? (76crimes.com) Priest: Transform shame in Dominica into change (76crimes.com) Panel will focus on anti-LGBT laws in the Caribbean (76crimes.com) We’re not seeking ‘special rights’ for homosexuals – MiriDom (dominicanewsonline.com) Can Gay Catholics Find A Home In The Catholic Church? (huffingtonpost.com) Colin Stewart May 24, 2013 The Latest Posts Turkey’s anti-LGBT crackdown expands; activists fight back Proposed Ukraine law would expand ban on anti-LGBTQ discrimination A third of LGBTQ groups say 2025’s drastic cuts will force them to close Bangladesh activists launch petition to end anti-LGBTQ discrimination Uganda’s ‘Not Free’ rating partly due to anti-LGBT laws Appeal to Indonesia to stop listing ‘LGBTQ culture’ as a national threat LGBTI+ rights activists in Turkey seek international support during crackdown Analysis: Cameroon’s anti-gay raids violated Cameroon’s own rules Ghana’s £10m deal is dead; gay fans won’t be lured to homophobic nation Turkey: 162 targeted in anti-LGBTQ+ raids Court blocks Ukraine's first-ever gay pride rally Previous Article Signs of Caribbean progress for Catholics, LGBT rights Next Article View Comments (2) Rev. Donald Hill, D.D. says: May 19, 2014 at 4:49 pm The Roman Catholic Church finds itself in a bind. A high percentage of its priests are homosexuals. Also a high percentage of the young men training in its seminaries are homosexuals. Added to this they have the problem of a priest shortage that has resulted in priests carrying a heavy work load with one priest often serving two or three parishes and older priests working well beyond normal retirement age. The problem with homosexuality in the church is not difficult to understand. These are men who do not plan to marry. They are attracted to the priesthood because it gives them a good reason for being single. Nobody is going to ask them why they are not dating or married. It also places them close to other males in what appears to be innocent relationships, altar-boys, counseling sessions, etc. It is becoming more necessary for the church to accept what the governments of their respective countries are accepting especially when anti-gay laws are being struck down, and laws are being passed against “discrimination”. The approval of the state is now very important to a church has lost so much status. Catholics have in their lifetime seen “the church that never changes” move from being totally against homosexuality to where they will accept gay priests if they remain celibate, to turning a blind eye if they don’t remain celibate which is the case with the priests who molest boys and are simply transferred to another parish. In view of this evolution of thought it should not surprise Catholics if the Church announces a radical change in its position but it will disappoint the faithful and result in a further exodus from the fold. For Vatican watchers the recent mandates from the new pope to be more accepting of gays was to be expected. The Bible forbids homosexuality in Romans 1:26,27, 1 Corinthians 9:9,10, 1 Timothy 1:9,10, Jude vs. 7, and the Word of God has not changed. Based on this Christians have stood against homosexuality for 2,000 years. A person who committed a homosexual act would be ex-communicated from the church. Same sex “marriages” have not been recognized by Christians nor by any nation with a Christian heritage until the last few years. The decriminalizing of homosexuality has not been because of new knowledge. It has been strictly political. Sincerely, Rev. Donald Hill, D.D., International Evangelist. Reply Rev. Donald Hill, D.D. says: June 10, 2016 at 6:07 pm The Roman Catholic Church is inconsistent. In the dark ages they turned “heretics” over to the civil authorities to be jailed or executed. Now they are saying the civil authorities should not make laws against homosexuality and although it is a sine it should not be a crime. How is it that centuries ago they had no problem accepting help from the civil authorities to enforce church teachings but now they don’t want civil laws that are in line with the Holy Bible and would make it easier for the church to uphold these righteous standards? Sincerely, Rev. Dr. Donald Hill Reply Leave a Reply Cancel reply Your email address will not be published. Name * E-mail * Website Notify me of new posts by email. Δ Related Posts Rightify Ghana trains dozens of queer youth leaders in advocacy Longtime Jamaican activist celebrates long-term marriage ‘We do not support criminalisation’ — Anglican archbishop in Ghana Ugandan trans pastor honored at WorldPride Amsterdam Cameroon: Freed from prison, 3 women go into business — with readers’ help Under attack in Russia, trans support group still racks up successes About The Erasing 76 Crimes news site covers the human toll of 66+ countries’ anti-gay laws and the struggle to repeal them. Member Members of the African Human Rights Media Network publish news articles and other media that educate readers about sexual minorities’ struggle for recognition of their human rights. Partner The St. Paul’s Foundation for International Reconciliation promotes LGBTQ+ rights through fact-based advocacy journalism and community projects. (California charity 80-0647355) © 2026 Erasing 76crimes. All rights reserved. Scroll To Top Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate Facebook Twitter Instagram Discover more from Erasing 76 Crimes Subscribe now to keep reading and get access to the full archive. Type your email… Subscribe Continue reading PRESS ESC TO CLOSE