CAISO head unhappy LGBTQ rights reform ignored again - CNC3 CNC3 Home News Business Sports Weather Livestream Traffic Cameras CAISO head unhappy LGBTQ rights reform ignored again Home Search Menu News CAISO head unhappy LGBTQ rights reform ignored again Carisa Lee August 23, 2024 [email protected] reporter Members of T&T’s lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and queer (LGBTQ) community, say they are disappointed at the PNM Constitution Review Committee’s decision to reject the reformation of sexual orientation rights. The decision was revealed at a special PNM convention last Sunday. “We have been waiting far too long for equal rights and protection in T&T,” Caiso Sex and Gender Justice director Dr Angelique Nixon said yesterday. In January, Government unveiled the National Advisory Committee on Constitutional Reform (NACCR). There were 14 public consultations before the committee presented its final report to the Prime Minister earlier this month. CAISO said it was one of the 32 civil society groups to submit recommendations to the NACCR. “We made the recommendation that sexual orientation and gender identity are to be added to the list of protected statuses under section four of the Constitution…And we shared several documents and sent in a five-page submission with all our evidence-based advocacy, calling for the Government to do this really important act that is in their purview,” Nixon explained. She said no political party has stepped up to do what is needed to offer protection and equal access in terms of the rights and freedoms of the LGBTQ community. “But the reality is we live in a multi-complex society…We cannot wait for the majority to grant rights and freedoms, it’s up to the Government to protect people who are marginalised, this is actually the job of the Government,” she reiterated. Nixon said they presented the proof of discrimination to the NACCR. “From the workplace, the healthcare, harassment from the police … we provided the evidence,” she said. “One of our strategies over the last several years is to call for the Equal Opportunity Commission to be amended and for additions/protections to be added. While it’s an important piece of legislation and is anti-discrimination, what’s happening is it defines sex but does not include sexual orientation.” She appealed to the authorities not to wait for the Court of Appeal’s decision on a novel constitutional challenge of this country’s homophobic sexual offences legislation. “We can’t be behind on all this. We live together, we understand that discrimination is harmful to everyone. Let’s be fair,” she said. Also contacted yesterday, Silver Lining Foundation executive director Jeremy Edwards said he was not proud that he spent his entire 20s fighting for his rights and the rights of those in the LGBTQ community. He said most people get to spend their 20s living their lives in this country, not fighting for their freedom. “A lot of other people get to use that time to live fuller enriching lives and loving lives while the rest of us had to hide in fear and shame with the hope that we can carve out spaces and places for us to feel safe,” he said. SHARE YOUR STORY Information Privacy Policy Live Stream Community Trinidad Guardian Newspaper TBC Radio Network About us CNC3 News Trinidad and Tobago (CNC3) is a television station privately owned by Guardian Media Limited serving Trinidad and Tobago. It broadcasts over-the-air on channels 12 and 14 and is seen throughout the FLOW cable system on channel 3 (DVS) or 103 (AVS). CNC3's studios are located at the Trinidad Guardian building located on 22–24 St. Vincent Street, Port of Spain, Trinidad and Tobago. It is both a local broadcast partner and affiliate of Al Jazeera and CNN International running simulcasts of both stations throughout the day. Facebook Twitter Instagram SHARE YOUR STORY Facebook Twitter Instagram Subscribe to the Trinidad Guardian Newspapers Home News Business Sports Weather Livestream Traffic Cameras ​ Sign up Dissmis Registration confirmation will be emailed to you. Sign up I'm already a member. Sign in ​ Sign in Dissmis Remember Forgot password? Sign in ​ Find Your Account Dissmis Get new password Sign in CNC3 Home News Business Sports Weather Livestream Traffic Cameras × Close Panel