Libya | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Libya At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? No Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? No Legal Gender Recognition Possible? No LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? No Last Update: March 12, 2026 The rights of sexual and gender minorities in Libya are extremely restricted . Consensual same-sex sexual activity is criminalized under the penal code. Articles criminalizing “illicit sexual intercourse” and “indecent acts” apply to both men and women and carry penalties of up to five years’ imprisonment. There are no legal protections from discrimination based on sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, or sex characteristics, and same-sex relationships are not legally recognized. Legal gender recognition is unavailable, leaving transgender people without the ability to change official identity documents. The enforcement of these laws and broader repression have intensified as a result of the country’s political instability following the 2011 revolution. Armed groups and security agencies have arrested individuals based on their perceived sexual orientation or gender identity, and reports indicate ongoing discrimination, violence, and arbitrary detention targeting LGBTIQ people. Authorities have also targeted individuals and businesses accused of promoting homosexuality, reinforcing a climate of fear and repression. Recent developments in 2024 and 2025 indicate further deterioration of fundamental freedoms. The government announced plans to reinstate a “morality police,” tasked with enforcing strict social norms and prosecuting individuals whose behavior or expression is deemed inconsistent with Libyan cultural or religious values. These measures—along with broader crackdowns on civil society, migrants, and organizations accused of promoting homosexuality or immorality—have raised serious concerns among human rights groups about increased surveillance, arrests, and repression. Social stigma and hostility toward sexual and gender minorities remain pervasive, reinforced by conservative social norms, weak rule of law, and ongoing conflict. Activists and community members often operate underground or flee the country due to threats, harassment, and violence. Overall, Libya remains one of the most restrictive environments globally for people of queer experience, with criminalization, lack of legal protections, and escalating moral policing continuing to severely limit safety and fundamental rights. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International