Taiwan dispatch: Transgender March held in Taipei as rights debate continues - JURIST - News DONATE NOW News ▾ All Legal News US Legal News World Legal News This Day @ Law Dispatches ▾ All Dispatches Afghanistan Canada EU Ghana India Iran Israel Italy Kazakhstan Kenya Myanmar Pakistan Peru Romania Sri Lanka Taiwan UK Ukraine US Commentary ▾ All Commentary Faculty Commentary Professional Commentary Student Commentary Features ▾ All Features Explainers Long Reads Multimedia Interviews Topics Rule of Law ▾ Materials Podcasts About ▾ FAQ Staff Awards Apply Journalist in Residence Board of Directors Contact Us Donate ▾ Why Support JURIST? Donate Honor Roll Search: Search Dispatches Photo captured by Yu-Yue Cheng. Taiwan dispatch: Transgender March held in Taipei as rights debate continues Yu-Yue Cheng | College of Law National Taiwan U., TW/CN November 4, 2025 01:06:19 pm Yu-Yue Cheng is a JURIST correspondent in Taiwan and a law student at National Taiwan University. I attended the 7th annual Taiwan Transgender March on the evening of October 24. Compared to the Taiwan Pride Parade held on the 25th, the Trans March was smaller and less known to the public. People gathered at the historic 228 Memorial Park , marching through Ximen district of Taipei and then circling back. An estimated 3,000 people showed up despite the rain. I observed people waving huge trangender flags with pink, blue and white stripes, while people handed out flyers and stickers. The march, though centered in Taiwan, included a notable number of international participants. Beside the international crowd, many local human rights groups and university societies joined, including the Taiwan Alliance to Promote Civil Partnership Rights TAPCPR (台灣伴侶權益推動聯盟 and Taiwan Tongzhi (LGBTQ+) Hotline Association ( 台灣同志諮詢熱線協會). The participants called for an end to discrimination against transgender people, and the abolition of surgical procedures required to change one’s legal gender. Photo captured by Yu-Yue Cheng. Transgender Issues in Taiwan Taiwan purports to be one of the most LGBTQ+-friendly countries in Asia, being the first to legalize same-sex marriage in 2019. However, transgender rights remain a rather marginalized topic. A lack of consensus and polarising views still haunts the debates on transgender issues, such as the requirements of changing one’s legal gender and the setting of unisex public toilets. What are the legal challenges transgender people face in Taiwan? To put it simply, there has long been an absence of legislation regarding this. However, the courts in Taiwan hold a rather positive attitude in recognising transgender’s rights. The administrative ruling by the Ministry of the Interior in 2008 requires people to submit several documents to change one’s registered gender: a diagnostic certificate signed by two psychiatrists, and proof of surgery that includes the complete removal of all genital organs. This 2008 requirement has faced widespread criticism by human rights groups such as TAPCPR. TAPCPR has argued that the legitimacy of the administrative ruling is questionable compared to enacted legislation—especially when a policy concerns such a fundamental right. More importantly, the surgical requirements unduly burden some transgender individuals as some may face barriers to getting these surgeries due to economic or health conditions, or simply because other available measures (such as gender-affirming hormone therapy) are more suitable for them. Human rights groups and legal scholars have argued that a more flexible framework is needed, such as allowing individuals to choose between a certificate by psychiatrists, hormone therapy, or surgery. More emphasis should be placed on receiving assistance to change genders rather than offering “proof” of required medical “treatments” for transgender people. Professor Yi-Chien Chen advanced a similar argument in her 2022 policy research report . Photo captured by Yu-Yue Cheng. Despite inaction from the legislative and administrative branches, several court judgments have marked key milestones in advancing transgender rights in Taiwan. The Supreme Administrative Court ruled in favour of transgender individuals registering gender changes without undergoing surgeries. Specifically, the courts decided that the administrative ruling requiring surgeries is disproportionate, and violates the rights to health, personality, and human dignity—all of which are protected under the Constitution . While some courts have allowed complainants to change their legal genders without surgeries, these courts still require certification by two psychiatrists. The courts in Taiwan have taken monumental steps in recognising transgender rights in Taiwan. However, a lack of enacted legislation makes the process of changing genders time-consuming—and even unpredictable—as each individual must first file their own lawsuit, then obtain an ultimate judgment to change genders without compulsory surgeries. Despite the fact that many people showed up in support of the Trans March, trans rights in Taiwan remain unsettled, and still face much public opposition. As Trans March participants continue to advocate for an inclusive environment for transgender people, society awaits the government’s response to the people’s demands. Photo captured by Yu-Yue Cheng. IMG_4647 IMG_4648 Opinions expressed in JURIST Dispatches are solely those of our correspondents in the field and do not necessarily reflect the views of JURIST's editors, staff, donors or the University of Pittsburgh. GET OUR DAILY DIGEST Email Address Subscribe Key: Subscribe Latest DISPATCHES Pakistan dispatch: Supreme Court defers jailed former PM’s medical case amid jurisdictional dispute Taiwan dispatch: motion for retrial filed over 2000 execution amid miscarriage of justice concerns Latest COMMENTARY Can the US Keep a Diplomat Out of the UN? by Matthew R. Morley | Morley & Associates | US | Russia The Rule of Law Has Been Miserable to Measure. That Just Changed. by David Stasior | Broken Scales Latest FEATURES ‘Accountability Is Deferred Rather Than Delivered’ — Conflict Resolution Scholar Johannes Langer on Mediation, Amnesty, and the Limits of the ICC ‘Genocide denial is often a state project’ — Iva Vukušić on Srebrenica and the politics of memory THIS DAY @ LAW Warren Commission report on the Kennedy assassination released On September 27, 1964, the report of the Warren Commission chaired by Chief Justice Earl Warren on the Kennedy assassination was released. The report essentially concluded that Lee Harvey Oswald had acted alone. Review the Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy . WWII Axis Powers formed On September 27, 1940, Chancellor Adolf Hitler of Germany, Foreign Minister Galeazzo Ciano of Italy and Ambassador Saburo Kurusu of Japan signed the Tripartite Pact , creating the World War II alliance of the Axis Powers. The Pact was later assented to by other members of the Axis, including Hungary, Romania, Croatia, Slovakia, Bulgaria, and the Kingdom of Yugoslavia. Home Attributions Disclaimer Privacy Policy Contact Us Copyright © 2026, JURIST Legal News & Research Services, Inc. JURISTnews is a collaboration with the University of Pittsburgh