Costa Rica backs International Day Against Homophobia | PinkNews About Us Advertise Work with us Login Register Latest News View all UK US World Health Politics Sport Business Culture View all TV Film Celebrity Drag Theatre Music Gaming Lifestyle View all Beauty Careers Fashion Relationships Travel Shopping View all Deals Recommended Fashion & Beauty Tickets Video View all News & Politics Entertainment Lifestyle Discover Trans Awareness Week Drag Race Explainers The Queer Agenda Toggle menu Account Register Login Community Costa Rica backs International Day Against Homophobia May 01 2008 Written by PinkNews Staff Writer Share Save for later Comment Gay activists have welcomed the decision of the government of Costa Rica to officially recognise IDAHO Day on May 17. The International Day Against Homophobia (IDAHO) is marked in over 50 countries on the anniversary of the day in 1990 when the World Health Organisation removed homosexuality from its list of mental illnesses. The President of the Republic of Costa Rica, Dr Oscar Arias Sanchez and the Health Minister, Maria Luisa Avila. said that public institutions in the Latin American nation must “facilitate, promote and support activities directed at the eradication of homophobia.” The health minister emphasised that homophobia had been a constraint for those who want to fight against AIDS. This achievement was due to the work of the LGBT Rights Organisation, CIPAC who declared “this decision will help to eradicate the norms and social practice which favour rejection and discrimination of those who only want to use, at a sexual level, their right to self determination : moreover this decision will encourage conviviality, peace, and social justice”. Louis-Georges Tin, founder of IDAHO congratulated CIPAC and the President of the Republic for this “remarkable achievement”. IDAHO is now officially recognised by the European Parliament, Belgium, the United Kingdom, Mexico, and several provinces of Canada, Brazil and Spain. IDAHO-UK campaigners are busily preparing for May 17th, with the aid of winning posters designed by students at the University of Arts, London, for other events and campaigns. Among the diverse events taking place across the country: In Woking, Quake Nightclub and Surrey Police are sponsoring an event expected to be attended by 500. The London Hotel in Southampton, in conjunction with Southampton City Council and the Hampshire and the Isle of Wight Police, is sponsoring an evening of entertainment, with donations on the door going to local victim support. In Dorset staff from the Over the Rainbow LGBT centre working closely with local police will be trying to persuade the public that “Homophobia Sucks” by giving out lollypops with this message in Bournemouth Town Centre. The Intercom Trust have launched an IDAHO Picnic and Anti-Homophobia Cake Competition and will be arranging picnics in Exeter and elsewhere in the South West to celebrate positive achievements in counteracting homophobia and reflecting on what still needs to be done at home and abroad. Scotland will also host an array of IDAHO events, including an IDAHO Youth Activism Event and a Playwrights Theatre Performance on IDAHO day itself. Glasgow Council are the first council to announce that they will be raising the rainbow flag for IDAHO day. It is hoped that, as was the case last year, many councils will follow their example. For details of events and posters, and contact information click here . Queer News. Straight Up. The LGBTQ+ stories you don’t want to miss, delivered to your inbox daily. Email address required Must be valid email Register By registering you agree to our Privacy Policy Thanks for registering! You can update your email subscriptions at any time in the My profile section of your account. Dec 01 2023 16 TV stars you grew up watching who later came out as LGBTQ+ Related articles News Jul 15 2021 ‘Reclaim Pride’ march to take place of Pride in London and bring parade ‘back to its roots’ World May 14 2020 Conservatives launch ‘shameful’ last-ditch bid to block same-sex marriage days before it becomes a reality in Costa Rica News Apr 24 2020 As Day of Silence goes virtual, queer students fiercely keep up the fight against homophobia and transphobia despite lockdown Community Mar 08 2020 20 influential queer women to celebrate on International Women’s Day 2020 Trans Nov 20 2019 What is International Transgender Day of Remembrance and why is it so important? Latest News Previous Next Celebrity Sep 25 Trans influencer calls out Nikki Glaser for stand-up joke about what’s ‘in her pants’ Culture Sep 25 Trans pro wrestling trailblazer Gisele Shaw signs exclusive NWA contract Bisexual Sep 25 The Traitors star Freddie Fraser’s mum’s emotional response to his coming out Celebrity Sep 25 Lili Reinhart says Hollywood ‘too afraid’ to greenlight lesbian vampire project Celebrity Sep 25 Carly Rae Jepsen describes moment Heated Rivalry inspired her son’s name Celebrity Sep 25 John Green ‘heartbroken’ for trans Harry Potter fans as he talks JK Rowling Current Affairs Sep 25 JD Vance claims James Talarico has a “weird obsession with children in drag” News Sep 25 Susan Sarandon, Hannah Einbinder and Caleb Hearon detained outside UN after protesting Netanyahu What to buy now Previous Next Fashion Mar 27 Connor Ives and MAC team up to re-release the iconic ‘Protect The Dolls’ t-shirt Music Mar 12 The Pussycat Dolls confirm reunion with new single and tour – how to get tickets Music Jan 23 A full guide to the 2026 Harry Styles Together, Together tour including dates and presale info Shopping Nov 24 2025 Ten truly awesome Christmas gifts you can buy to support queer-owned businesses Trans Sep 09 2025 Lush creates ‘luxurious’ trans flag bath bomb to support trans charities Tickets Jun 25 2025 Dolly Parton announces mini Las Vegas residency after wrapping her last tour almost a decade ago Shopping May 15 2025 LEGO celebrates late gay icon Keith Haring with new art set: ‘Want this so bad’ Music Apr 18 2025 Primavera Sound’s most iconic queer performances, from Troye Sivan to Ethel Cain Exclusive Previous Next Exclusive Sep 11 Ania Magliano talks SNL UK season two and anti-LGBTQ voices in comedy: ‘We do edgy in the right way’ Exclusive Sep 11 Elliot Tuttle on Blue Film’s personal inspiration, rejection and taboo: ‘It’s about loneliness’ Exclusive Sep 09 OF star Andy Lee on love for gay fans, ‘poisonous’ creators and ‘harmful’ stunts: ‘Gay men lift me up every day’ Exclusive Sep 07 Real Housewives of London spill the tea: ‘She’d go to the opening of a packet of crisps’ Opinion Sep 04 Katseye in London: A showcase of real talent deserving of the deafening screams Exclusive Sep 02 Adrian Chiarella and Joe Bird on tackling conversion therapy in gay horror Leviticus Exclusive Aug 21 Sziget Festival drag and circus troupe want audiences to feel like family Exclusive Aug 20 Gay wrestler Anthony Bowens says Heated Rivalry shows authentic life of closeted athletes Register to save articles and more. It'll only take a minute and it's free. JOIN US TODAY! Already have an account? Log in here "/> Download the PinkNews app Award winning LGBTQ+ journalism About us Editorial Policy Contact us Advertise Work for us Terms and conditions Privacy policy Privacy manager Privacy Manager