A criminological exploration of queerphobic violence and victimisation of self-identifying queer sexual minority in KwaMashu Township. <link rel="stylesheet" href="styles.cf390c6bfbe7555f.css"> Skip to main content Communities & Collections Browse Statistics English العربية বাংলা Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Suomi Français Gàidhlig ગુજરાતી हिंदी Magyar Italiano Қазақ Latviešu मराठी Nederlands Polski Português Português do Brasil Русский Srpski (lat) Српски Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Yкраї́нська Tiếng Việt 繁体中文 Log In Log in New user? Click here to register. Have you forgotten your password? Home College of Humanities School of Applied Human Sciences Criminology and Forensic Studies Masters Degrees (Criminology and Forensic Studies) A criminological exploration of queerphobic violence and victimisation of self-identifying queer sexual minority in KwaMashu Township. A criminological exploration of queerphobic violence and victimisation of self-identifying queer sexual minority in KwaMashu Township. Loading... Files Buthelezi_ Ayanda_Nomfundo_2024.pdf (2.43 MB) Date 2024 Authors Buthelezi, Ayanda Nomfundo. Journal Title Journal ISSN Volume Title Publisher Abstract South Africa is internationally celebrated for its progressive Constitution, which guarantees fundamental human rights, freedom, and equality. However, the country grapples with pervasive crime, violence, and ongoing discrimination, including hate speech and hate crimes, particularly against queer individuals. While the Bill of Rights prohibits discrimination based on gender or sexual orientation and mandates national legislation to prevent such discrimination, a gap exists between these legal protections and the lived realities of queer communities, especially in township settings. This study focused on queerphobic violence and victimization experienced by self-identifying sexual minorities in KwaMashu Township, Durban, KwaZulu-Natal. It explored the nature and consequences of victimisation, perceptions of queerphobic violence, the adequacy of available support and interventions, and the strategies employed by queer individuals to navigate their safety in this context. Using a qualitative approach, the study purposively sampled 15 queer participants from the Imvelo Yesizwe Organisation in KwaMashu. Data were collected through in-depth interviews and analysed thematically. Findings revealed that significant victimisation of queer individuals is rooted in societal prejudice, lack of knowledge about diverse sexual orientations, and inadequate education about homosexuality. The study highlights the urgent need for educational initiatives to address misconceptions and reduce violence against queer communities in township settings. Description Masters Degree. University of KwaZulu-Natal, Durban. Keywords Citation URI https://hdl.handle.net/10413/23841 Collections Masters Degrees (Criminology and Forensic Studies) Endorsement Review Supplemented By Referenced By Creative Commons license Except where otherwise noted, this item's license is described as CC0 1.0 Universal Full item page Copyright Statement Items in ResearchSpace are protected by copyright, with all rights reserved, unless otherwise indicated. DSpace software copyright © 2002-2026 LYRASIS Accessibility settings