Decriminalisation of gay sex on the Cook Islands stalls yet again About Us Advertise Work with us Login Register Latest News View all UK US World Health Politics Sport Business Culture View all TV Film Celebrity Drag Theatre Music Gaming Lifestyle View all Beauty Careers Fashion Relationships Travel Shopping View all Deals Recommended Fashion & Beauty Tickets Video View all News & Politics Entertainment Lifestyle Discover Trans Awareness Week Drag Race Explainers The Queer Agenda Toggle menu Account Register Login World Decriminalisation of gay sex on the Cook Islands stalls yet again in devastating blow to queer community Oct 01 2020 Written by Patrick Kelleher Share Save for later Comment Plans to decriminalise homosexuality in the Cook Islands have been kicked down the road yet again (Envato Elements) Plans to decriminalise homosexuality have been kicked down the road on the Cook Islands in a devastating blow to the local queer community. The region, which is self-governing but has a free association arrangement with New Zealand, punishes sex between men with up to seven years in prison. The Cook Islands parliament was due to hear the results of a report on Wednesday (30 September) looking at potential changes to the country’s Crimes Bill – but the meeting was deferred for three months, according to the Stuff.co.nz . The deferral means that a potential change to the law, which has been demanded by LGBT+ activists for years, has been kicked down the road once more. The nation was historically accepting of same-sex relationships but anti-LGBT+ sentiment became commonplace through colonisation. Activists have been calling for years for sex between men to be decriminalised in the Cook Islands. In 2017, it finally looked like that might happen when a select committee recommended that the two clauses that criminalise homosexuality be removed from the Crimes Bill. The committee recommended that sections 154 and 155 of the law, which was introduced in 1969, be scrapped. Following that report, the Pacific nation’s parliament removed “indecent acts between men” and sodomy from a draft version of the Crimes Bill. The Cook Islands were set to decriminalise homosexuality – but plans were later scrapped. However, MPs in the country later backtracked and reinstated the clauses in November 2019 following a sustained pressure campaign from religious groups. The bill – which also bans bestiality – has been widely condemned by Te Tiare Assocation, the only LGBT+ group on the Cook Islands. The chairman of the select committee, Tingika Elikana, said in November that they reinstated the clauses in the draft bill after some people in the community raised their “concerns” about the plan to decriminalise homosexuality. “One of the arguments surrounding it is people are saying there is no one charged with those kind of offences like homosexuality, witchcraft, sodomy and all that,” Elikana said at the time. “But they say on the other side of the coin, maybe because those provisions are there in the act that’s why nobody is doing it, so they are doing it in the privacy of their homes which is another argument. “If you remove those provisions then you more or less encourage it to be in the open because now there is no law that says that kind of conduct is prohibited.” A petition calling on the government to decriminalise homosexuality has been signed by more than 5,000 people. More: cook islands decriminalisation of homosexuality gay sex New Zealand Queer News. Straight Up. The LGBTQ+ stories you don’t want to miss, delivered to your inbox daily. Email address required Must be valid email Register By registering you agree to our Privacy Policy Thanks for registering! You can update your email subscriptions at any time in the My profile section of your account. Nov 29 2023 56 celebrities you didn’t know are gay, bisexual or lesbian Related articles World Aug 19 2023 How the Cook Islands fought off the shackles of colonialism and freed its LGBTQ+ community Law Apr 17 2023 Cook Islands finally decriminalises homosexuality: ‘Now we are truly equal’ News Jul 09 2021 Island nations of Saint Lucia and Saint Kitts and Nevis yet again refuse to legalise gay sex World May 21 2021 Namibia on track to finally decriminalise gay sex: ‘Freedom will ring!’ World Jul 16 2020 Sudan has dropped the death penalty as a punishment for gay sex. Queers will instead be thrown in prison for loving who they love Latest News Previous Next Celebrity Sep 25 Trans influencer calls out Nikki Glaser for stand-up joke about what’s ‘in her pants’ Culture Sep 25 Trans pro wrestling trailblazer Gisele Shaw signs exclusive NWA contract Bisexual Sep 25 The Traitors star Freddie Fraser’s mum’s emotional response to his coming out Celebrity Sep 25 Lili Reinhart says Hollywood ‘too afraid’ to greenlight lesbian vampire project Celebrity Sep 25 Carly Rae Jepsen describes moment Heated Rivalry inspired her son’s name Celebrity Sep 25 John Green ‘heartbroken’ for trans Harry Potter fans as he talks JK Rowling Current Affairs Sep 25 JD Vance claims James Talarico has a “weird obsession with children in drag” News Sep 25 Susan Sarandon, Hannah Einbinder and Caleb Hearon detained outside UN after protesting Netanyahu What to buy now Previous Next Fashion Mar 27 Connor Ives and MAC team up to re-release the iconic ‘Protect The Dolls’ t-shirt Music Mar 12 The Pussycat Dolls confirm reunion with new single and tour – how to get tickets Music Jan 23 A full guide to the 2026 Harry Styles Together, Together tour including dates and presale info Shopping Nov 24 2025 Ten truly awesome Christmas gifts you can buy to support queer-owned businesses Trans Sep 09 2025 Lush creates ‘luxurious’ trans flag bath bomb to support trans charities Tickets Jun 25 2025 Dolly Parton announces mini Las Vegas residency after wrapping her last tour almost a decade ago Shopping May 15 2025 LEGO celebrates late gay icon Keith Haring with new art set: ‘Want this so bad’ Music Apr 18 2025 Primavera Sound’s most iconic queer performances, from Troye Sivan to Ethel Cain Exclusive Previous Next Exclusive Sep 11 Ania Magliano talks SNL UK season two and anti-LGBTQ voices in comedy: ‘We do edgy in the right way’ Exclusive Sep 11 Elliot Tuttle on Blue Film’s personal inspiration, rejection and taboo: ‘It’s about loneliness’ Exclusive Sep 09 OF star Andy Lee on love for gay fans, ‘poisonous’ creators and ‘harmful’ stunts: ‘Gay men lift me up every day’ Exclusive Sep 07 Real Housewives of London spill the tea: ‘She’d go to the opening of a packet of crisps’ Opinion Sep 04 Katseye in London: A showcase of real talent deserving of the deafening screams Exclusive Sep 02 Adrian Chiarella and Joe Bird on tackling conversion therapy in gay horror Leviticus Exclusive Aug 21 Sziget Festival drag and circus troupe want audiences to feel like family Exclusive Aug 20 Gay wrestler Anthony Bowens says Heated Rivalry shows authentic life of closeted athletes Register to save articles and more. It'll only take a minute and it's free. JOIN US TODAY! Already have an account? Log in here "/> Download the PinkNews app Award winning LGBTQ+ journalism About us Editorial Policy Contact us Advertise Work for us Terms and conditions Privacy policy Privacy manager Privacy Manager