Zim govt adopts manual for treating gays, sex workers at health centres - NewZimbabwe.com Facebook Instagram Youtube Sign in Join Home News Zimbabwe Africa World Health & Community Science & Tech Travel All News Business Companies Markets Economy All Business Sport Football Tennis All Sport Showbiz Music Film Fashion All Showbiz, Arts & Culture Opinion Diaspora News Crime Business Showbiz Sports All Diaspora More Courts & Crime Support Videos & Pictures What’s On Columnists Citizens Reports Letters Our ePaper Sign in Welcome! Log into your account your username your password Forgot your password? Create an account Sign up Welcome! Register for an account your email your username A password will be e-mailed to you. Password recovery Recover your password your email Search Login/Register Our App Contact Us Portal My Account Facebook Instagram X Youtube Home News Zimbabwe Africa World Health & Community Science & Tech Travel All News Business Companies Markets Economy All Business Sport Football Tennis All Sport Showbiz Music Film Fashion All Showbiz, Arts & Culture Opinion Diaspora News Crime Business Showbiz Sports All Diaspora More Courts & Crime Support Videos & Pictures What’s On Columnists Citizens Reports Letters Our ePaper Search here... Search NP Newspaper Publication Home News Zimbabwe Africa World Health & Community Science & Tech Travel All News Business Companies Markets Economy All Business Sport Football Tennis All Sport Showbiz Music Film Fashion All Showbiz, Arts & Culture Opinion Diaspora News Crime Business Showbiz Sports All Diaspora More Courts & Crime Support Videos & Pictures What’s On Columnists Citizens Reports Letters Our ePaper Search here... Search Sign in Welcome! Log into your account your username your password Forgot your password? Get help Create an account Create an account Welcome! Register for an account your email your username A password will be e-mailed to you. Password recovery Recover your password your email A password will be e-mailed to you. Zim govt adopts manual for treating gays, sex workers at health centres By: New Zimbabwe Date: 9th July 2018 Facebook X Pinterest WhatsApp By Staff Reporter THE ministry of health has approved a training manual to be used by all health practitioners in treating gays and sex workers in the country’s health institutions. Gays, sex workers and drug users have in the past complained of being followed by negative stereotypes, something that has seen many of them shy away from public health institutions for fear of being mistreated. Some drug users and gays have avoided the public institutions for fear of being set up for police arrests through tip-offs by health staff. However, the health ministry last month released a 68-page training handbook that seeks to educate and equip healthcare providers at all health centres with the requisite tools of handling the group. “The programme is to educate and equip healthcare providers in Zimbabwe with the knowledge and skills to enable them to provide health services that support and adequately cater for the unique healthcare needs of sex workers, men who have sex with men, transgender and non-gender conforming people and people who inject and use drugs,” the manual reads in part. Right to healthcare According to the manual, every patient has a right to healthcare and humane treatment. “There is nowhere in policy or law that states that it is illegal to provide healthcare services to members of key population groups, including sex workers, drug users and addicts, transgender people, gays and lesbians. “This means that it’s every service provider’s duty to provide members of key populations with the same care and treatment that they provide to other patients. “The fact that sex work, drug use and some sexual acts are considered illegal in Zimbabwe can create a variety of situations that negatively affect members of key populations more than the general populations. “This undermines HIV prevention for the whole nation by affecting these individuals’ access to healthcare,” says government through the manual. Appropriate language Healthcare providers will be required to use appropriate language when treating or interviewing patients from the key populations over their ailments. “Begin by building rapport and confidence with the client. Remind clients that information they share will be confidential. Clients have a right to know if what they disclose will be documented and how that information will be used. “Remember to use non-judgmental and non-confrontational approach when discussing drug use with clients.” The release of the training manual which will also be used in the training of healthcare students comes at a time when the Zanu PF government is warming up to gays while sex workers are no longer being arrested or harassed by the police. This follows a court ruling a few years ago against the indiscriminate arrest of sex workers by police. Last month, Victor Matemadanda, the war veterans’ association secretary general met with officials from the Gays and Lesbians Association of Zimbabwe (GALZ) in signs the Zanu PF led administration was ready to dump its anti-gay stance. During then President Robert Mugabe’s era, police and other state security agents used to constantly harass and arrest gays. 0 0 votes Article Rating 2 COMMENTS Subscribe Login Notify of new follow-up comments new replies to my comments Please login to comment 2 Comments Oldest Newest Most Voted https://p1n-slots.danabala.kz 1 month ago … [Trackback] […] Find More on on that Topic: newzimbabwe.com/zim-govt-adopts-manual-for-treating-gays-sex-workers-at-health-centres/ […] 0 เทปใส 23 days ago … [Trackback] […] Info on that Topic: newzimbabwe.com/zim-govt-adopts-manual-for-treating-gays-sex-workers-at-health-centres/ […] 0 Zimbabwean festival celebrates traditional mbira music New Zimbabwe - 27th September 2026 Your Opinion Poll Paramount settles lawsuit with US states, clearing way for $110bn merger with Warner Bros Showbiz, Arts & Culture New Zimbabwe - 22nd September 2026 UK changes visa rules to let modern slavery victims leave abusive employers, offering relief to African migrant workers News Headlines New Zimbabwe - 4th September 2026 Related articles Zimbabwe Parliament exposes monopoly, rot in sugar industry value chain ZIMBABWE's sugar industry is choking under a milling monopoly, with farmers accruing huge costs while a single company... Zimbabwe Lowest-paid employee in retail sector to earn US$330 per month The lowest-paid employee in the retail and wholesale subsectors will now earn US$331,00 in monthly salary following yet... Zimbabwe ZWG inflation rises to 3.7% in September, ZimStats reports THE ZWG annual inflation rate rose to 3.7% in September 2026, gaining 0.8% from the previous month's 2.9%,... Zimbabwe Bindura water pipeline commissioned after 34-year wait A 22.1-kilometre Masembura water pipeline in Bindura has been commissioned, ending a project that had remained on the... NewZimbabwe NewZimbabwe.com – The Zimbabwe News You Trust is Zimbabwe’s leading online newspaper and published by New Zimbabwe Media Ltd. The platform brings you the latest breaking News, Business, Showbiz, Sports, Diaspora and gives you everything you’ve come to expect and love. Our Forums are vibrant and gives everyone a chance to be heard. On your computer, tablet smart phone or on our App its quick, easy and free access all the news you love. NewZimbabwe.com is updated continually with the latest news to help you feed your addiction with stories & photos from Zimbabwe and many more! Information Terms & Conditions Advertising Terms & Refund Policy Privacy Policy Contact Us Our ePaper Facebook Instagram Youtube Latest news Zimbabwean festival celebrates traditional mbira music Showbiz, Arts & Culture 27th September 2026 1 By Xinhua MELODIOUS sounds from traditional instruments brought Zimbabwe's musical... Man mauled to death by four dogs News Headlines 27th September 2026 1 A 39-year-old man was fatally attacked by four dogs... Fleeing trio nabbed aboard bus after foiled ZESA transformer vandalism Courts & Crime 27th September 2026 1 POLICE have arrested three men in connection with the... Popular news Bloemfontein landlord loses conviction appeal after organising gang rape of Zimbabwean tenant News 24th September 2026 1 IOL A Bloemfontein landlord who was convicted of acting as... US$15m bill, fewer ounces: Mimosa’s cost problem deepens Business 24th September 2026 0 Mimosa Mining Company spent US$15 million on sustaining capital... Harare-Bulawayo road to close at National Sports Stadium as 30,000 expected for Zimbabwe vs DRC qualifier Sports 24th September 2026 1 Motorists have been warned of traffic disruptions on Monday,... Privacy Policy Terms & Conditions Contact Us ©NewZimbabwe.com. All Rights Reserved. error: Content is protected !! wpDiscuz Insert