Northeast Today – A digital news media platform Home NER Assam Arunachal Pradesh Manipur Meghalaya Mizoram Nagaland Sikkim Tripura Voices Editorials Magazine Cover Stories Opinion Art and Culture History and Heritage Food and Health Fashion and lifestyle Finances Agriculture Environment Sports NET Monthly Issues Archives Contact Support NET
Tripura Police Arrest Seven Bangladeshi Nationals, Including Two Transgender Individuals & Four Disguised As Third-Gender 2nd August 2024 No Comments Posted in Featured , Northeast , Tripura Abhijit Nath, NET Correspondent, Tripura Agartala, August 02, 2024: The Tripura police apprehended seven Bangladeshi nationals at the Panisagar Check Post in the North district on Thursday evening. Among those arrested were two transgender individuals and five others who were disguised as third-gender persons. They were traveling by bus and were en route to Mumbai.
Panisagar police station staff conducted a search operation at the Panisagar check point on the Assam-Agartala National Highway. During this operation, they intercepted a bus bearing registration number AS01LC-1412 traveling from Agartala to Guwahati and arrested seven suspected passengers. These individuals were taken into custody by the Panisagar police for further questioning.
Upon investigation, it was revealed that all seven detainees were residents of Bangladesh. They had illegally entered India through the Akhaura border without proper documentation and were en route to Mumbai via a long-distance bus.
Among the arrested individuals, two were identified as third-gender persons. The remaining five had been disguising themselves as third-gender individuals to deceive the public and earn money.
The arrested individuals are: Mahi (17) alias Bahar Hussain of Comilla District; Saddam (23) of Mymensingh District; Abid Hasan (18) of Bhola Barisal District; Shubo Das (16) of Sabar District; Munni Das (18), aka Kali – Natore District; Billal Hussain (22) of Gazipur District; and Md. Togar Hussain Bari (26) of Jashore District.
During interrogation, it was found that three of the seven individuals were newcomers, while the remaining four had been residing in various Indian cities including Mumbai for several years. Their primary objective was to deceive the public by posing as third-gender individuals and earn a livelihood through this fraudulent activity.
The Panisagar police have taken strict measures to ensure that such illegal activities are curbed and that the culprits are brought to justice. Further investigations are ongoing to uncover more details about their operations and any potential accomplices.
Tags: Bangladeshi nationals , Check Point , Individuals , Panisagar , Police , Third-Gender , Transgender , Tripura
Leave a Reply Cancel reply Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *
Fill out this field
Fill out this field
Please enter a valid email address.
Are you human? Please solve: Post Comment
Search
Search for:
More Articles
Mizoram Congress Protests In Aizawl Over Alleged EC Irregularities, Demands Removal Of CEC Gyanesh Kumar 3 hours ago 0
Amit Shah Likely To Visit Mizoram On October 5 3 hours ago 0
“BJP’s Real Test Will Be 2028 Assembly Polls, Legislator Numbers Do Not Reflect Public Mandate,” Says Meghalaya Congress Chief Pala 3 hours ago 0
Related News
Tragic Demise of Newborn’s Mother At South Tripura District Hospital January 20, 2024 0
Guwahati Asian Film Festival (GAFF) 2025 To Begin On February 7 February 6, 2025 0
Manipur Observes Martyrs’ Day To Honour Freedom Fighters, Pays Tribute To Mahatma Gandhi 30 Jan at 8:36 pm 0
Tripura: Congress MLA Sudip Roy Barman Supports TSF’s Demand for Roman Script in Kokborok March 21, 2025 0
Tripura: Left Front & Congress MPs, MLAs Submit Memorandum To Governor March 11, 2023 0
Women in Tripura’s Purba Laxmibil Turn to Herbal Abir Production, Achieve Financial Independence March 1, 2025 0
About NET About Us Advertise Career Contact Privacy Policy Terms of Service Northeast Assam Arunachal Pradesh Manipur Meghalaya Mizoram Nagaland Sikkim Tripura Magazine Subscription Issues Archives Connect Facebook Twitter Instagram YouTube © Northeast Today. Powered by Atmotech Solution .
Menu