Falkland Islands Same-Sex Marriage Update – ROB SALERNO Skip to content ROB SALERNO Writer. Editor. Journalist. Menu About Rob Salerno Writing Books Smashing Young Man Fucking Stephen Harper Screenwriting Playwriting & Dramaturgy Comedy Acting Headshots Video Resume Journalism News and Opinion Hosting Copy Writing and Editing Contact Twitter @robsalerno Instagram @robsalerno YouTube @robsalerno E-Mail Ten Foot Pole Theatre Search for: Falkland Islands Same-Sex Marriage Update June 22, 2017 J ust a little post so I can update some information on Wikipedia. The Falkland Islands Legislative Council passed a same-sex marriage and civil partnership bill back in March, but there’s no obvious information on the government’s web site about when bills receive royal assent, nor is there an archive of current laws on the web site. This has led to some confusion about whether the bill is actually law there. So, I contacted the Islands’ registrar general, and this is the response I received. Since I noticed she’s also the registrar general for (the uninhabited) South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands territory, I followed up to check if same-sex marriage is legal there. She says it is not. Rex Wockner had a link to a press release from the government on his blog that basically said the same thing, but didn’t specifically say that the bill received royal assent or when it became effective. We now have a confirmation. Anyway, this blog post exists solely so that I can cite a public reference on Wikipedia when I update same-sex marriage pages. You can follow my daily updates on same-sex marriage news from around the world on my Twitter feed @LGBTMarriage. Share this: Email a link to a friend (Opens in new window) Email Share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Share on X (Opens in new window) X Share on Tumblr (Opens in new window) Tumblr Like this: Like Loading… Uncategorized Post navigation Older post Steam Room Stories – Straight Guys and BJs Newer post Tri-Curious available on Dekkoo Follow Me Instagram X YouTube @robsalerno My Tweets Recent Posts 2023 World LGBT rights progress – Part 6: Global Trends 2023 World Same-Sex Marriage and LGBT Rights Progress – Part 5: Europe 2023 World Same-Sex Marriage and LGBT Rights Progress – Part 4: Africa and Oceania 2023 World Same-Sex Marriage and LGBT Rights Progress – Part 3: Asia 2023 World Same-Sex Marriage and LGBT Rights Progress – Part 2: Latin America and Caribbean Supporter Follow me on Twitter/Instagram/YouTube @robsalerno . Powered by WordPress | Theme by Themehaus Loading Comments... You must be logged in to post a comment. %d