Transgender Woman in Brutal Hate Crime Attack in Tshwane Tavern - MambaOnline - LGBTQ South Africa online Skip to content Southern Africa's longest-running LGBTQ+ News and Community Platform Home News Culture & Events Health & Well-Being Community Project Transcend Resources & Advice Relationships Sexuality Health Identity Organisations About Our Story Advertise With Us Newsletter Editorial Code Contact Foundation Donate Home News Culture & Events Health & Well-Being Community Project Transcend Resources & Advice Relationships Sexuality Health Identity Organisations About Our Story Advertise With Us Newsletter Editorial Code Contact Foundation Donate Search Donate SIGN UP Home News Culture & Events Health & Well-Being Community Project Transcend Resources & Advice Relationships Sexuality Health Identity Organisations About Our Story Advertise With Us Newsletter Editorial Code Contact Foundation Donate Home News Culture & Events Health & Well-Being Community Project Transcend Resources & Advice Relationships Sexuality Health Identity Organisations About Our Story Advertise With Us Newsletter Editorial Code Contact Foundation Donate Transgender Woman in Brutal Hate Crime Attack in Tshwane Tavern Roberto Igual Jan 6, 2025 HEADLINES Aobakwe Mahlobo, before she was left with severe injuries to her face in a hate crime attack in Tshwane (Image supplied) A 23-year-old transgender woman from Tshwane, South Africa has spoken out after surviving a violent, unprovoked hate crime attack that has left her with both physical and emotional scars. Aobakwe Mahlobo, a make-up artist originally from Soshanguve and now living in Winterveld, was assaulted at a local tavern on 26 December 2024. The incident occurred at around 1:30 am while she was seated and socialising. Describing the attack to MambaOnline, Mahlobo said a man sitting nearby began making hateful comments about gay and lesbian people. “I didn’t know him,” she explained. “Then he said how much he hates them and that ‘they don’t deserve to live.’” The situation escalated when the man suddenly smashed a bottle into Mahlobo’s face as she was lighting a cigarette. “There was blood everywhere, and he said to me, ‘I told you I’m gonna kill you,’” she recalled. Despite her injuries, Mahlobo fought back, prompting her attacker to flee. She was rushed to Kgabo Clinic by a friend for emergency treatment. Serious Injuries and Emotional Trauma Photos seen by MambaOnline show the horrific extent of Mahlobo’s facial injuries, images we have chosen not to publish. She suffered deep cuts to her mouth, lips, nose, cheek, and forehead. “My mouth was cut into pieces. My upper lip had to be stitched. I also had stitches in my lower lip on the left side, including the nose, left cheek, and on my forehead,” she said. Following the attack, Mahlobo opened a case of assault at Dube Police Station. However, she says no progress has been made in the investigation. The trauma of the incident has gone beyond the physical and left her afraid to openly express her gender identity. “I’m emotionally damaged and drained,” Mahlobo admitted. “It’s made me feel not comfortable being the person that I am, especially in public.” Anti-LGBTIQ+ Hate Crimes A defiant Mahlobo said she wanted to speak out about her ordeal to highlight the ongoing violence and discrimination faced by transgender and LGBTIQ+ individuals, despite the country’s progressive constitutional protections. In 2024, at least four transgender women were killed in South Africa in circumstances thought to be hate crimes. These were Jo-Ann Isaks , 27 (Upington), Karabelo Pudumo , 18 (Kimberley), Thabang Mmelusi Maboela , age unknown (Johannesburg), and Clemmy Hadebe , 22 (Johannesburg) These are in addition to 10 other reported murders of LGBTIQ+ individuals in the country last year. The number is likely to be higher as many cases do not make headlines and incidents of non lethal violence may go unreported. In May 2024, President Cyril Ramaphosa signed the Hate Crimes and Hate Speech Bill into law although it remains unclear when its provisions will be comprehensively implemented by the criminal justice system. If you or someone you know has been affected by an LGBTIQ+ hate crime, contact OUT LGBT Well-being at report@out.org.za for assistance and support. Leave a Comment Cancel reply Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked * Comment * Name * Email * Website Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment. Δ Trending Articles Thami Dish Is Married! Meet His Husband Dr Wesley Willis and Read Their Love Story Cape Town Rainbow Crosswalk Vandalism Unleashes Flood of Anti-LGBTQ+ Hate Man Who Says He Vandalised Cape Town Rainbow Crossing Comes Forward Cape Town’s Rainbow Crossing Vandalised – Twice! ‘I’m Surprised I Woke Up’: Gay Man Attacked with Broken Bottle in Pretoria West Your subscription could not be saved. Please try again. Your subscription has been successful. Mamba Wrap Newsletter Our FREE weekly newsletter that keeps you updated on the latest LGBTQ+ news and views - delivered straight to your inbox! Enter your email address to subscribe Provide your email address to subscribe. For e.g abc@xyz.com SUBSCRIBE Facebook X-twitter Instagram Youtube Threads Tiktok Linkedin Whatsapp Sign Up Privacy Policy RSS Feeds Sign Up Privacy Policy RSS Feeds Copyright © 2026 MambaOnline Facebook X-twitter Instagram Youtube Threads Tiktok Linkedin Whatsapp We use cookies to ensure that we give you the best experience on our website. If you continue to use this site we will assume that you are happy with it. Ok