Hate crimes If you are having issues calling 112, click on chat or call +3545990112. Other ways to reach emergency services. Skip to content Menu Abuse Prejudice and violence against marginalized groups Hate crimes Hate crimes Hate crime is an umbrella term. It is used when a criminal offense is committed because of prejudice or hatred the perpetrator has towards the group that the victim is a part of. Table of contents Victims and perpetrators Victims and perpetrators What makes something a hate crime? What makes something a hate crime? Hate speech Hate speech Discrimination Discrimination Related topics Related topics Victims and perpetrators Group can be defined based on: Country of origin Colour of skin Race Religion Disability Sexual characteristics Sexuality Gender identity Other similar factors Perpetrators of a hate crime: Personal contact with the victim is often nonexistent. Has prejudice or hatred toward a group. Commits the act because the victim is in that group. The act is toward the entire group. This also applies if the perpetrator believes that the victim is part of the group even though they are not. What makes something a hate crime? The term hate crime does not appear in Icelandic law, but it states that when deciding a punishment, it must be considered if the act was done because of the victim's status. It is necessary to be able to demonstrate that the offence was committed out of prejudice or hatred towards a group in order for the offence to be defined as a hate crime. Violence and other crimes When it comes to offences that are already defined as punishable by law (such as assault, rape, murder and damage to property), it can increase the punishment if the crime was committed because of the victim's status ( General Penal Code, Article 70 ). Hate speech Hate speech is when hatred and prejudice against a group is spread through expression. Either to individual members of the group or to the group in general. In Iceland there is freedom of expression, but there are still laws and regulations that apply to expression. One of them is the law on hate speech. It prohibits ridiculing, slandering, insulting or threatening an individual or group because of their origin, colour, race, religion, disability, sexual characteristics, sexual orientation and gender identity (General Penal Code, Article 233 a). Hate speech can include: comments with words (both spoken and written) images (like memes) symbols (such as a swastika) sound (such as barking) Although there is a law on hate speech, the issue is complex, and it is not a given that all prejudiced expressions fall under hate speech. Read more about hate speech Discrimination There are laws in Iceland that protect people from discrimination when it comes to services and accessibility. The law protects people from discrimination based on their origin, skin colour, race, religion, disability, sexual characteristics, sexual orientation, and gender identity. Some examples of what is illegal: A person must not be denied the right to buy a product if others are allowed to buy it A person must not be denied services that are available to others An individual must not be denied access to a place that is open to the public General Penal Code, Article 180. Related topics Marginalized groups Read more Neglect against adults Read more Coercion and restraint Read more Microaggression Read more Abuse against immigrants Read more Abuse against disabled people Read more Elder Abuse Read more Abuse against queer people Read more Hate crimes Read more Call 112 in an emergency. Neyðarlínan ohf. Skógarhlíð 14, 105 Reykjavík Telephone: 570-2000 Send feedback about Neyðarlínan's website Contacting 112 What can I do? Abuse in close celationships Partners Children and teenagers Icelandic Maritime Traffic Service Human trafficking Anti-Bullying Policy and Response Plan Contact us