Aruba Votes for LGBT Civil Union as first Island in the Caribbean ● Live Deals & Offers Blog News Nederlands Italiano English (US) Português English (UK) Español Deutsch Svenska Book Now Go Why Aruba Why Aruba Adventure Romance Culture Wellness Eat & Drink Families Weddings Aruba - Happiness that stays with you. A trip to sunny Aruba will leave you relaxed and refreshed for your journey home Discover Aruba Feel the Aruba Effect Things To Do Things To Do Beaches & coves On the water Natural Wonders Dining Nightlife Arts & Culture Sightseeing & Tours Shopping Wellbeing Sports & Golf Calendar of events Itineraries Deals & Offers Aruba offers the best vacation deals in the Caribbean. Check out today's top travel deals on accommodations, dining, entertainment, and more! See all deals & offers Deaxo's Local Shortcut Plan Your Visit Plan Your Visit Hotels & Resorts Vacation Rentals Timeshares All-inclusive Getting to Aruba Getting around Aruba Aruba by cruise Aruba vacations Tips for visitors Guest Services Deals & offers Want to visit the best vacation destination of the Carribean? Go to Aruba.com's Travel Guide and prepare your trip to the One Happy Island! See all deals & offers Book a trip Rooms Flights Activities Check-in Check-out Search Depart Return Select 1 Adult 2 Adults 3 Adults 4 Adults 5 Adults 6 Adults 7 Adults 8 Adults 9 Adults Passengers Origin City or Airport Search Arrival Departure Search Our Island Our Island History & culture Island facts Regions 360 map One Happy Island 70 square miles of happiness Our tiny island gem is nestled in the warm southern Caribbean with nearly 100 different nationalities happily living together. We welcome all visitors with sunny smiles and a warm embrace. Meet Our Locals An Introduction to Aruba You saved your first item To share or access this list from other devices, create a MyAruba login . Book Now ● Live Deals & Offers Blog News Nederlands Italiano English (US) Português English (UK) Español Deutsch Svenska Page not translated × The exact page you are looking for has not been translated. Continue anyway Stay on this page Confirm Selection This site uses cookies. Some are essential while others improve your browsing experience and allow us to advertise. For more info visit the privacy policy page. Allow inessential cookies for: Analytics (site-wide) Advertisement (internet-wide) Personalization (site-wide) Your preferences have been updated. News Sep 09, 2016 Aruba Votes for LGBT Civil Union as first Island in the Caribbean Aruba Votes for LGBT Civil Union as first Island in the Caribbean On the 8 th of September 2016, the parliament of Aruba voted in favor of the civil law amendment granting civil partnerships to same-sex couples, as the first island in the Caribbean. With 11 votes in favor and 5 votes against, the civil law amendment was passed yesterday night in a packed parliament building filled with supporters. After a 2.5-year battle, Desiree de Sousa- Croes, an openly-gay parliamentarian, can finally celebrate. de Sousa-Croes: “The last 2 months were strenuous but thanks to the continuous support of my family, friends and the numerous organizations* that have supported and fought for these basic human rights, we can now say that Aruba is the pioneer in the Caribbean when it comes to LGBT rights.” The online petition by the human rights advocacy group, Igualdad Aruba, reached almost 20,000 signatures, and 70% of the people who signed were under 38. “Every action had its reaction”, Croes said when mentioning that multiple organizations united to fight for this cause. “True Colors, an organization lobbying for gay rights, contacted the international All Out platform to help bring global attention to this matter and as such we received approximately 50,000 votes from countries around the world.” “It is so beautiful to have people tell you that you are an example for the rest of the Caribbean”, said de Sousa-Croes who has been invited by the Parliamentarians for Global Action (PGA) to lead the same mission regarding equality in the neighboring island of Santo Domingo. “We are a small island but this has so much impact on the rest of the Caribbean. Aruba has set the tone and now the other Caribbean islands can follow”, says a joyous de Sousa-Croes. For more information on the One Happy Island, visit www.aruba.com . Engage with Aruba via social media at www.facebook.com/ArubaFans or @Aruba on Twitter and @arubatourism on Instagram. *Organizations which contributed were: Igualdad Aruba, True Colors Aruba, Alternative Lifestyle Aruba, Equal Rights Aruba and Straight Alliance. Previous Article Next Article Start Booking Your Trip To Aruba Rooms Flights Activities Deals & Offers Check-in Check-out Search Depart Return Select 1 Adult 2 Adults 3 Adults 4 Adults 5 Adults 6 Adults 7 Adults 8 Adults 9 Adults Passengers Origin City or Airport Search Arrival Departure Search From To Search We’re just getting started with the amazing effects Aruba has to offer. Dig into your trip details below to unlock a Caribbean experience that will fill you with sunshine and send you home with a happy afterglow that never fades. Plan Your Effect TRIP PLANNER myAruba planner Save your favorite places and experiences to a custom itinerary you can manage while you're visiting the island: Start Planning ? I'm looking for: ✦ ✦ ✦ Travel Inspiration Practical Information Sign-up to find your Voluntourism Experience Email me Stay up to date × Compelete this form to receive emails from the Aruba Tourism Authority. First Name This is a required field. Last Name This is a required field. Email Address This is a required field. Please enter a valid email address. Select Your Country Afghanistan Albania Algeria American Samoa Andorra Angola Anguilla Antarctica Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Aruba Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas (the) Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bermuda Bhutan Bolivia (Plurinational State of) Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Bouvet Island Brazil British Indian Ocean Territory (the) Brunei Darussalam Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cabo Verde Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cayman Islands (the) Central African Republic (the) Chad Chile China Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands (the) Colombia Comoros (the) Congo (the Democratic Republic of the) Congo (the) Cook Islands (the) Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Curaçao Cyprus Czechia Côte d'Ivoire Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic (the) Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Eswatini Ethiopia Falkland Islands (the) [Malvinas] Faroe Islands (the) Fiji Finland France French Guiana French Polynesia French Southern Territories (the) Gabon Gambia (the) Georgia Germany Ghana Gibraltar Greece Greenland Grenada Guadeloupe Guam Guatemala Guernsey Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Heard Island and McDonald Islands Holy See (the) Honduras Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran (Islamic Republic of) Iraq Ireland Isle of Man Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Jersey Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Korea (the Democratic People's Republic of) Korea (the Republic of) Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Lao People's Democratic Republic (the) Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Macao Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands (the) Martinique Mauritania Mauritius Mayotte Mexico Micronesia (Federated States of) Moldova (the Republic of) Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Montserrat Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands (the) New Caledonia New Zealand Nicaragua Niger (the) Nigeria Niue Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands (the) Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Palestine, State of Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines (the) Pitcairn Poland Portugal Puerto Rico Qatar Republic of North Macedonia Romania Russian Federation (the) Rwanda Réunion Saint Barthélemy Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Martin (French part) Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Samoa San Marino Sao Tome and Principe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Sint Maarten (Dutch part) Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands South Sudan Spain Sri Lanka Sudan (the) Suriname Svalbard and Jan Mayen Sweden Switzerland Syrian Arab Republic Taiwan (Province of China) Tajikistan Tanzania, United Republic of Thailand Timor-Leste Togo Tokelau Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Turks and Caicos Islands (the) Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates (the) United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (the) United States Minor Outlying Islands (the) United States of America (the) Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) Viet Nam Virgin Islands (British) Virgin Islands (U.S.) Wallis and Futuna Western Sahara Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe Åland Islands Select Your Country This is a required field. I would like to receive email communications from the Aruba Tourism Authority. This is sent to the address I have notified and informs about the island and current travel offers for Aruba. The e-mail address you provided will not be passed on to third parties. The consent can be revoked at any time by sending an e-mail to support@aruba.com or by clicking on the link to unsubscribe at the bottom of the email. I would like to receive email communications from the Aruba Tourism Authority. This is sent to the address I have notified and informs about the island and current travel offers for Aruba. The e-mail address you provided will not be passed on to third parties. The consent can be revoked at any time by sending an e-mail to support@aruba.com or by clicking on the link to unsubscribe at the bottom of the email. This is a required field. You have successfully subscribed! Privacy policy Subscribe Ok Why Aruba Adventure Romance Culture Wellness Eat & Drink Families Weddings Things To Do Beaches & coves On the water Natural Wonders Dining Nightlife Arts & Culture Sightseeing & Tours Shopping Wellbeing Sports & Golf Itineraries Calendar of events Plan Your Visit Hotels & Resorts Vacation Rentals Timeshares All-inclusive Getting to Aruba Getting around Aruba Aruba by cruise Aruba vacations Tips for visitors Guest Services Our Island History & culture Island facts Regions 360 map Follow Us Contact Us Email: support@aruba.com Phone: 1-800-862-7822 Aruba Convention Bureau Travel Agents Organizations News Media Local Partners Stay Up To Date Stay Up To Date First Name This is a required field. Last Name This is a required field. Email Address This is a required field. Please enter a valid email address. Select Your Country Afghanistan Albania Algeria American Samoa Andorra Angola Anguilla Antarctica Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Aruba Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas (the) Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bermuda Bhutan Bolivia (Plurinational State of) Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Bouvet Island Brazil British Indian Ocean Territory (the) Brunei Darussalam Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cabo Verde Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cayman Islands (the) Central African Republic (the) Chad Chile China Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands (the) Colombia Comoros (the) Congo (the Democratic Republic of the) Congo (the) Cook Islands (the) Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Curaçao Cyprus Czechia Côte d'Ivoire Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic (the) Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Eswatini Ethiopia Falkland Islands (the) [Malvinas] Faroe Islands (the) Fiji Finland France French Guiana French Polynesia French Southern Territories (the) Gabon Gambia (the) Georgia Germany Ghana Gibraltar Greece Greenland Grenada Guadeloupe Guam Guatemala Guernsey Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Heard Island and McDonald Islands Holy See (the) Honduras Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran (Islamic Republic of) Iraq Ireland Isle of Man Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Jersey Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Korea (the Democratic People's Republic of) Korea (the Republic of) Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Lao People's Democratic Republic (the) Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Macao Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands (the) Martinique Mauritania Mauritius Mayotte Mexico Micronesia (Federated States of) Moldova (the Republic of) Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Montserrat Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands (the) New Caledonia New Zealand Nicaragua Niger (the) Nigeria Niue Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands (the) Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Palestine, State of Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines (the) Pitcairn Poland Portugal Puerto Rico Qatar Republic of North Macedonia Romania Russian Federation (the) Rwanda Réunion Saint Barthélemy Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Martin (French part) Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Samoa San Marino Sao Tome and Principe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Sint Maarten (Dutch part) Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands South Sudan Spain Sri Lanka Sudan (the) Suriname Svalbard and Jan Mayen Sweden Switzerland Syrian Arab Republic Taiwan (Province of China) Tajikistan Tanzania, United Republic of Thailand Timor-Leste Togo Tokelau Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Turks and Caicos Islands (the) Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates (the) United Kingdom United States Minor Outlying Islands (the) United States of America (the) Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) Viet Nam Virgin Islands (British) Virgin Islands (U.S.) Wallis and Futuna Western Sahara Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe Åland Islands Select Your Country This is a required field. I would like to receive the Canadian One Happy Aruba Newsletter from the Aruba Tourism Authority. This is sent once a month by e-mail to the address I have notified and informs about the island and current travel offers for Aruba. The e-mail address you provided will not be passed on to third parties. The consent can be revoked at any time by sending an e-mail to support@aruba.com or by clicking on the link to unsubscribe at the bottom of the newsletter. I would like to receive the German One Happy Aruba Newsletter from the Aruba Tourism Authority. This is sent once a month by e-mail to the address I have notified and informs about the island and current travel offers for Aruba. The e-mail address you provided will not be passed on to third parties. The consent can be revoked at any time by sending an e-mail to support@aruba.com or by clicking on the link to unsubscribe at the bottom of the newsletter. This is a required field. Subscribe You have successfully subscribed! ©2026 Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Your browser doesn't support HTML5 video tag Your browser doesn't support HTML5 video tag Your browser doesn't support HTML5 video tag