Skip to navigation
Skip to content
menu
Open Menu
MyServiceNSW
Logged in
MyServiceNSW
Manage account
Logout of MyServiceNSW
close
Close Menu
Living in NSW
keyboard_arrow_right
close
Close Menu
keyboard_arrow_left
Living in NSW Back to previous menu
Living in NSW east
Aboriginal information and services Community services Driving, boating and transport Education and training Emergency Environment, land and water Family and relationships Grants and funding Health and wellbeing Housing and construction Legal and justice Life Events Regional and primary industries Visas and migration
Popular right now
NSW school holidays east NSW public holidays east NSW Government east NSW Digital ID east
Living in NSW
Working and business
keyboard_arrow_right
close
Close Menu
keyboard_arrow_left
Working and business Back to previous menu
Working and business east
Aboriginal information and services Business and economy Education and training Employment Grants and funding Money and taxes Visas and migration
Popular right now
NSW skills lists east Department of Customer Service careers east Working interstate east
Working and business
What's happening
keyboard_arrow_right
close
Close Menu
keyboard_arrow_left
What's happening Back to previous menu
What's happening east
About NSW Arts and culture Events in NSW Visiting and exploring NSW NSW public holidays NSW school holidays
Popular right now
NSW map catalogue east Visit Sydney east Visit regional NSW east Walks near me east
What's happening
Have your say
Easy Read
Home Ministerial releases Harmful LGBTQ+ conversion practices now banned in NSW
Ministerial media release
Harmful LGBTQ+ conversion practices now banned in NSW
Published:
4 April 2025
Released by:
Attorney General, Minister for Health
Listen
Dangerous and damaging LGBTQ+ conversion practices will be banned from today.
The Conversion Practices Ban Act 2024 makes conversion practices, which can include 'conversion therapy' and suppression practices, a crime punishable by up to five years’ imprisonment.    It also creates a scheme allowing civil complaints about conversion practices to be made to Anti-Discrimination NSW.    Conversion practices are based on the false ideology that LGBTQ+ people have a ‘disorder’ or require treatment.     This can include psychological or medical interventions, counselling, or subtle and repeated messages that LGBTQ+ people can change or suppress their sexual orientation or gender identity with faith or effort.    Anti-Discrimination NSW can investigate complaints about conversion practices occurring from 4 April 2025, and, if appropriate, try to resolve the matter through conciliation.     It can also refer matters to the NSW Civil and Administrative Tribunal in certain circumstances.    It will also deliver information sessions and resources about the new law including free online videos and tools and referrals to support services.     Conversion practices inflict significant harm on members of the LGBTQ+ community.    People who deliver or preform conversion practices that cause substantial mental or physical harm face up to five years’ jail.     Taking someone out of NSW to deliver 'conversion therapy' carries a maximum three-year jail sentence.     The ban does not prevent general religious teaching or expressions of religious principles, or parental discussions with their children related to sexual orientation, gender identity, sexual activity or religion.     It is targeted at a practice, treatment or sustained effort directed at someone to change their sexual orientation or gender identity.    This follows ongoing work by the NSW Government to progress reforms that ensure all members of our community feel valued, respected and equal.    The Premier issued a formal apology last year to people convicted under discriminatory laws that criminalised homosexual acts, and the Government passed legislation that meant more of these offences were able to be extinguished.    In September, the NSW Government supported all 19 recommendations delivered by the Special Commission of Inquiry into LGBTIQ hate crimes, which examined the unsolved deaths of LGBTIQ people and found shortfalls in historical responses by the NSW Government.    The Government established the inaugural LGBTIQ+ Advisory Council, which is working to develop NSW’s first LGBTIQ+ Inclusion Strategy.    The Government supported the amended Equality Bill which passed NSW Parliament after being introduced by the Independent Member for Sydney Alex Greenwich.    Attorney General Michael Daley said:     “So-called ‘conversion therapy’ inflicts real and significant harm on members of the LGBTQ+ community.     “Everyone deserves to be respected for who they are. There is nothing ‘wrong’ with LGBTQ+ people. They do not need ‘fixing’ or to be ‘saved’.    “We are indebted to the survivors of this insidious practice who shared their experiences and advocated for this important reform.”     Minister for Health Ryan Park said:     “These sorts of practices are incredibly harmful and dangerous, and they have severe and lasting health impacts.    “Today, we’re bringing an end to them.    “I want to thank the many individuals and groups who engaged with the Government on this legislation, to make this ban a reality.”    Founder and CEO of Ambassadors and Bridge Builders International (ABBI) Anthony Venn-Brown OAM said:     “The ban on dangerous and discredited LGBTQA conversion practices is a welcome move.     “I grew up when being gay was a criminal offence and mental health professionals believed they could cure people of homosexuality.     “It caused me great stress and anxiety. I did everything to change it, including conversion ‘therapy’.     “I often thought of suicide.    “After coming out, I’ve spent decades supporting people who were told they were broken and needed ‘fixing’. Today, people are still taking their lives – or contemplating it – over this issue.     “LGBTQA people should be celebrated, accepted and affirmed. This law will protect vulnerable people from harm, save lives and make NSW a safer place for people of all sexual orientations and gender identities.”       CEO of Equality Australia Anna Brown OAM said:     "We stand with victim survivors in welcoming this law which prohibits these archaic and harmful practices, which have already caused untold harm to LGBTQA people.    "Abuse dressed up as pastoral care or guidance is a breach of trust and power. Telling someone they are broken or sick because of who they are is profoundly psychologically damaging.    "Not only will this law save countless people from a lifetime of pain – and in some cases save lives – it also sends a powerful message that LGBTQA people are whole and valid, just as we are."
Related ministerial articles Ministerial media release Memorial to historical forced adoption practices unveiled The NSW Government has established a permanent public memorial to those affected by forced adoption practices. Ministerial media release Minns Labor Government’s medicinal cannabis driving reforms pass NSW Parliament The Minns Labor Government’s legislation to create a more commonsense system for drivers who use lawfully prescribed medicinal cannabis has passed the NSW Parliament. Ministerial media release New powers being introduced to fight organised crime The Minns Labor Government will today introduce its organised crime crackdown to Parliament, delivering tough new laws to target criminal networks and give law enforcement stronger powers to disrupt them.
download Download as PDF print Print this page share Share this page Facebook LinkedIn X Email mail
Top of page
north
This page is managed by
Department of Communities and Justice
In collaboration with
NSW Health
Your rating will help us improve the website.
Popular
NSW public holidays
Service NSW locations
State services
State flag
About this website
Access to information
Accessibility statement
Copyright
Disclaimer
Privacy statement
NSW Government directory
Departments
Cabinet Office
Climate Change, Energy, the Environment and Water
Communities and Justice
Creative Industries, Tourism, Hospitality and Sport
Customer Service
Education
Health
Planning, Housing and Infrastructure
Premier's Department
Primary Industries and Regional Development
Transport
Treasury
NSW Government
The Premier
NSW Ministers
Find your local Member of Parliament
Boards and Committees
Find a job in NSW Government
About NSW
NSW Government communications
Unsolicited proposals
We pay respect to the Traditional Custodians and First Peoples of NSW, and acknowledge their continued connection to their country and culture.
Copyright © 2026