Skip to main content Skip to news navigation, settings and search Explore the ABC More from ABC Close menu ABC   ABC News   ABC iview   ABC listen   Kids & Students   Indigenous   Information & Services Editorial Policies Read our editorial guiding principles Follow the ABC news iview listen Loading ABC News Just In For You Politics World Business Analysis Sport Lifestyle Entertainment Quizzes More Search News Home Just In For You Analysis Rural Watch Live Health Indigenous Politics Science Deep Time Elections World Environment Investigations Business Local news Quizzes Sport AFL NRL Football Tennis Cricket Netball Lifestyle Wellbeing Relationships & Family Food & Recipes Personal Finance Home & Garden Entertainment TV & Movies Books Music Pop Culture Arts Facebook YouTube Instagram Twitter Emergency Backstory Newsletters 中文新闻 BERITA BAHASA INDONESIA TOK PISIN Appearance (BETA) Follow system settings Select an option Always light Always dark Follow system settings ABC iView ABC Listen ABC News News Home NT's CLP government confirms plans to scrap Labor's hate speech changes Share Share article NT's CLP government confirms plans to scrap Labor's hate speech changes M By Matt Garrick T By Tilda Colling Topic: Discrimination Posted Sun 2 Mar 2025 at 9:56am Sun 2 Mar 2025 at 9:56am Sun 2 Mar 2025 at 9:56am LGBTQIA+ advocates say changes to the NT's Anti-Dscrimination Act have become "a political football". ( Supplied ) In short: The Country Liberal Party government has confirmed it will follow through on a pre-election commitment to reverse changes to the NT's Anti-Discrimination Act passed by NT Labor three years ago. The changes cracked down on offensive language used in the community and banned religious schools from only hiring staff who shared the same faith. What's next? The looming changes have been welcomed by some religious groups but criticised by the NT's Anti-Discrimination commissioner and members of the LGBTQIA+ community. abc.net.au/news/nt-anti-discrimination-hate-speech-laws-repealed/104991288 Link copied Share Share article The Northern Territory government has confirmed it is planning to scrap a key clause in the territory's anti-discrimination laws, claiming it could lead to people being "attacked for telling a joke". The Country Liberal Party (CLP) government's changes will reverse controversial measures introduced by the former NT Labor government just three years ago. The changes made it unlawful to "to offend, insult, humiliate or intimidate" another person or group because of a personal characteristic such as race or gender, which could result in action by the NT's Anti-Discrimination Commission. Labor also passed an amendment that removed an exemption for religious schools, allowing them to refuse to hire people outside of that faith. At the time, the measures were applauded by members of the NT's LQBTQIA+ community but opposed by religious groups who argued they impinged on religious freedom. Attorney-General Marie-Clare Boothby said Labor's changes would be reversed in parliament this year. Marie-Clare Boothby says the government's changes will "restore religious freedoms". ( ABC News: Pete Garnish ) "Before the election, we promised we would restore the freedom of speech and religion Labor's Anti-Discrimination Bill destroyed," she said. "We are not repealing the law in full — our changes will … restore religious freedoms to religious schools so they can hire and accept persons of the same religion. "[They will also] remove the vilification provision introduced by Labor that prohibits behaviour that could offend. "We believe Territorians should not have their speech policed or be attacked for telling a joke by a bureaucratic agency." The man in charge of that agency, NT Anti-Discrimination Commissioner Jeswynn Yogaratnam, strongly rebuked the new CLP government for pursuing the changes. Jeswynn Yogaratnam has warned the government may be "opening the doors for a very dangerous stream of hate speech". ( ABC News: Pete Garnish ) "In this time where we are dealing with a lot of antisemitism, Islamophobia, xenophobia … there is a need to have provisions like that to protect our community," he said. "Some of those comments that have impacts regarding their race, their sexual orientation, even their religion, [create] a deep, deep sense that they do not belong. "And that is not a joke. "I think you're opening the doors for a very dangerous stream of hate speech here in the Northern Territory." Dismay for some, agreement from others Former NT Young Australian of the Year nominee and LGBTQIA+ advocate Paige Horrigan was among those on the front line advocating for Labor's changes in 2022. They've expressed their dismay over the looming reversal. Paige Horrigan believes politicians shouldn't "play around with people’s human rights". ( ABC News: Callum Finn ) "I wasn't expecting this sort of topic to come around again so soon as a political football, for the various parties to play around with people's human rights," they said. "[When it passed in 2022] it was an overwhelming amount of joy for a lot of people in the community, especially security in areas that inherently should be safe." But others have voiced a sense of relief that the CLP was making good on its commitment. Bishop of Darwin Charles Gauci said many people of religious faith in the NT "believed that some of our rights were being eroded away" by Labor's changes. "We certainly believe we should have rights for our schools to be able to teach according to our faith beliefs," he said. Charles Gauci says the issue is "not about discriminating – it’s about rights". ( ABC News: Dane Hirst ) "And for ministers to be able to preach, respectfully of course, about what we truly believe. "I want to be emphatic in saying it's not about discriminating — it's about rights. "We want to make sure there's no room for litigation." The CLP government said the changes were part of this year's legislative agenda but that it did not have a firm timeline on when they would be introduced to parliament. Share options Copy link Facebook X (formerly Twitter) See more ABC coverage in your search results Make ABC a preferred source in Google Top Stories This man faced 50 hacking charges a decade ago. He doubts OpenAI will face any Topic: Cyber Crime A dangerous new reality is taking hold in Europe L Analysis by Laura Tingle What happened when Xi Jinping met Donald Trump? A Analysis by Allyson Horn Nepal's flood survivors still waiting to find out what comes next Topic: Floods Everything you need to know ahead of today's AFL grand final Topic: Explainer Popular now Bali Nine drug mule released from jail after being spared death row Topic: Law, Crime and Justice A dangerous new reality is taking hold in Europe L Analysis by Laura Tingle Only Princess Diana's brother knew the double meaning in her eulogy, until now Topic: Royalty Related topics Alice Springs Darwin Discrimination LGBTQIA+ Laws NT Religious Schools Top Stories This man faced 50 hacking charges a decade ago. He doubts OpenAI will face any Topic: Cyber Crime A dangerous new reality is taking hold in Europe L Analysis by Laura Tingle What happened when Xi Jinping met Donald Trump? A Analysis by Allyson Horn Nepal's flood survivors still waiting to find out what comes next Topic: Floods Everything you need to know ahead of today's AFL grand final Topic: Explainer Just In Fremantle turns purple as Dockers attempt grand final history Topic: AFL Sat 26 Sep 2026 at 6:18am Sat 26 Sep 2026 at 6:18am Sat 26 Sep 2026 at 6:18am Neale the common thread in Fremantle and Brisbane's eerie shared history C Analysis by Chris De Silva Sat 26 Sep 2026 at 6:15am Sat 26 Sep 2026 at 6:15am Sat 26 Sep 2026 at 6:15am Why Sarah 4.0 needs no further upgrades following year of injury hell Topic: Road Cycle Racing Sat 26 Sep 2026 at 6:13am Sat 26 Sep 2026 at 6:13am Sat 26 Sep 2026 at 6:13am 'You're still a dad': Father turns grief into support for other families Topic: Family Sat 26 Sep 2026 at 6:10am Sat 26 Sep 2026 at 6:10am Sat 26 Sep 2026 at 6:10am More Just In Back to top ABC News Contact ABC News Your home of Australian stories, conversations and events that shape our nation. This service may include material from Agence France-Presse (AFP), APTN, Reuters, AAP, CNN and the BBC World Service which is copyright and cannot be reproduced. Follow ABC News Sections ABC News Home Just In For You Watch Live News Live ABC NewsRadio Politics Elections Australia World Sport Live Sport Rural Business Analysis Science Health Lifestyle Entertainment Quizzes More Topics News in Language Chinese 中文 Tok Pisin Berita Bahasa Indonesia Related ABC News app Local News ABC Emergency ABC Indigenous ABC Religion & Ethics ABC Asia ABC Pacific Music & Audio ABC Listen Home triple j Live Radio Movies & TV ABC iview Home List of ABC Shows Live TV TV Guide Kids & Students BTN Education Heywire Takeover ABC Kids Get the ABC News AM newsletter Get the latest ABC News delivered to your email inbox Email address Subscribe Your information is being handled in accordance with the ABC Privacy Collection Statement . All ABC newsletters Stay informed and connected with the ABC. Covering a wide range of topics and brands including News, iview, listen, and more. Browse all ABC newsletters ABC home Information & Services Editorial Policies Accessibility Help Contact Us Commercial Careers About the ABC Privacy Policy Terms of Use © 2026 ABC Follow the ABC We acknowledge Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the First Australians and Traditional Custodians of the lands where we live, learn and work.