Chief Minister looks to legalise same-sex marriage - 3FM Isle of Man 3FM On Air Now Charlie Smith 10:00pm - 1:00am Email Now Playing I Knew I Loved You Savage Garden Download Navigation Toggle Menu Home 3FM Relax Listen to 3FM Relax Schedule Playlist Search On Air Presenters Schedule Shows Competitions Matt Fletcher Jason Quinn Tony James Jono Evans Charlie Smith Neil Cowie Chris Hedley Leo Tomlinson News News Team Isle of Man Isle of Man Business Election 2026 UK World Showbiz Skeet Sport Business Strange BUT True! Webcams Weather Election 26 2026 General Election Latest Election News The Results Advertise Music Playlist Search Listen Live 3FM App Island Info Island Info Add an event About Contact Us Advertise Vacancies ALEXA Facebook Twitter Linkedin Listen Live Listen Chief Minister looks to legalise same-sex marriage News Home More from Isle of Man News Tuesday, 9 June 2015 00:00 popup#open" data-popup-size-param="550x500" target="_blank"> Share on Facebook Share on Messenger popup#open" data-popup-size-param="645x580" target="_blank"> Share on Messenger popup#open" data-popup-size-param="550x400" target="_blank"> Share on X Share on Whatsapp Chief Minister Allan Bell "I believe in same-sex marriage" That's the message from the Chief Minister - who says he's looking to introduce it on the Isle of Man. Allan Bell will discuss the prospect of formulating a bill to scrap prohibitive legislation with Bishop of Sodor and Man, Robert Paterson. Tynwald and the Government of Northern Ireland are the only British powers that don't allow gay, bisexual or transgender people to wed. Mr Bell says equality and human rights must prevail: Listen to this audio Share popup#open" data-popup-size-param="550x500" target="_blank"> Share on Facebook Share on Messenger popup#open" data-popup-size-param="645x580" target="_blank"> Share on Messenger popup#open" data-popup-size-param="550x400" target="_blank"> Share on X Share on Whatsapp More from Isle of Man News Eating disorder support group to host first meeting A new group says it's hoping to support parents and carers looking after those who suffer eating disorders. Online historic newspapers halted next month Manx National Heritage says you won't be able to read historic newspapers online at its iMuseum site from October. Yellow warning for coastal overtopping Forecasters have issued a yellow weather warning for lunchtime today. Weather forces Tough Mucka postponement Organisers of a huge sporting event this weekend say it's had to be put back. Police investigating Irish 'paedophile hunter' video Police say they're investigating after being handed footage of a man who's said to have travelled from the Island in a paedophile sting. Updated rules for special constables due before Tynwald Special Constables on the Island could be getting new rules. Pre-election meeting in Marown next month General election fever may be over - but voters in a local authority will go to the polls again next month. Microwave food leads to early hours callout for firefighters Food burning in a microwave sparked a callout for Island's Fire and Rescue Service this morning. Comments Add a comment Log in to the club to add your comment. Search Search Search Recently Played 10:10pm Something About The Way You Look Tonight Elton John Download 10:07pm Walking Away Craig David Download 10:02pm One Moment In Time Whitney Houston Download 9:53pm Sleeping Satellite Tasmin Archer Download Listen Live Listen Facebook X X Instagram YouTube Terms & Conditions Competition Terms Privacy Policy Contact Us The Isle of Man's Feel Good Radio Station © Copyright 2026 3FM. Powered by Aiir .