LGBT Rights in Montevideo, Uruguay | Equaldex Home Equality Index Issues Timeline Public Opinion More ▾ ⭐️ Rate Your Region Compare Organizations Editor Dashboard Help Login / Join Regions ▸ South America ▸ Uruguay LGBT Rights in Montevideo Department Montevideo is governed by federal Uruguay law. Learn more Homosexuality ⚢ ✔ Legal Gay Marriage ⚭ ✔ Legal Censorship ✔ No censorship Changing Gender ✔ Legal, no restrictions Gender-Affirming Care ✔ Legal Non-Binary Gender Recognition Ambiguous Hate Crime Protections ✔ Sexual orientation and gender identity Discrimination ✔ Illegal Employment Discrimination ✔ Sexual orientation and gender identity Housing Discrimination ✔ Sexual orientation and gender identity Adoption ✔ Legal Intersex Infant Surgery ✔ Full ban Military ✔ Legal Donating Blood ✔ Legal Bathroom Access ✔ Protected Conversion Therapy ✔ Banned Age of Consent ✔ Equal 💬 Join Equaldex's LGBTQ+ Discord to discuss LGBT rights and chat! Public Opinion Montevideo is lacking public opinion data. Help expand our understanding of the public's view on LGBTQ+ issues in Montevideo by sharing a link to a survey from a reputable organization. Suggest Public Opinion Data Have you lived in or visited Montevideo? Share your experience of being LGBTQ+ in Montevideo. Take Survey History Homosexual activity in Montevideo ? Homosexual activity in Montevideo is legal. Current status Since Dec 4, 1933 Legal Homosexual activity is legal according to the Uruguay Penal Code. Details Sources: www.wipo.int/wipolex/en/det&hellip; Report error · Log Jan 17, 1889 –Dec 3, 1933 Male illegal, female legal The 1888 Penal Code of Uruguay took effect in 1889 and criminalised sodomy under Article 278. Details Sources: database.ilga.org/api/downl&hellip; Report error · Log Same-sex marriage in Montevideo ? Same-sex marriage in Montevideo is legal. Current status Since Aug 5, 2013 Legal Same-sex marriage became legal in Uruguay after the passing of the Equal Marriage Act. Uruguay became the fourteenth country in the world to legalise gay marriage, and the third South American country to do so after Argentina and Brazil. Details Sources: www.telesurtv.net/articulos&hellip; www.lanacion.com.ar/1172501&hellip; newsfeed.time.com/2013/08/0&hellip; Report error · Log Dec 28, 2007 –Aug 4, 2013 Civil unions (marriage rights) In 2007 , Uruguay became the first country in South America to provide recognition to same-sex couples on a national level by providing them recognition as civil unions with the same rights as married couples. Details Sources: www.thepinknews.com/2007/12&hellip; Report error · Log Until Dec 27, 2007 Unrecognized Until 2007 , there was no legal recognition provided to same-sex couples in Uruguay. However, there was also never an explicit ban on marriage. Details Sources: www.impo.com.uy/bases/texto&hellip; Report error · Log Censorship of LGBT issues in Montevideo ? Censorship of LGBT issues in Montevideo is no censorship. Current status Since Mar 1, 1985 No censorship In Uruguay, there are no laws restricting the discussion or promotion of LGBTQ+ topics since the end of the military dictatorship in 1985 . Details Sources: www.state.gov/reports/2023-&hellip; www.sexualrightsinitiative.&hellip; Report error · Log Jun 27, 1973 –Feb 28, 1985 State-enforced During the 1973 - 1985 civic-military dictatorship era in Uruguay, LGBTIQ+ people were frequently targeted, especially transgender people, frequently torturing them for their gender identity or sexual orientation. Details Sources: www.sexualrightsinitiative.&hellip; remezcla.com/culture/urugua&hellip; Report error · Log Until Jun 26, 1973 No censorship Before the 1973 military coup, there was no known censorship of LGBTIQ+ topics in Uruguay. Details Sources: remezcla.com/culture/urugua&hellip; Report error · Log Right to change legal gender in Montevideo ? Right to change legal gender in Montevideo is legal, no restrictions. Current status Since Oct 25, 2009 Legal, no restrictions Uruguay's Law on the Right to Gender Identity and Change of Name and Sex in Identification Documents was passed in 2009 and provided for legal gender recognition. While neither surgery nor medical diagnosis was required, until 2018 , it had to be analysed by a civil registry specialising in gender identity for approval. On October 18, 2018 , Uruguay modified the procedure in the Comprehensive Trans Law requiring the applicant to request the amendment before the Honorary Advisory Commission for Identity and Gender Change and provided self-identification. Details Sources: www.gaystarnews.com/article&hellip; tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layou&hellip; Report error · Log Until Oct 24, 2009 Illegal Until 2009 , there was no legal gender recognition provided in Uruguay. Details Sources: tbinternet.ohchr.org/_layou&hellip; Report error · Log Gender-affirming care in Montevideo ? Gender-affirming care in Montevideo is legal. Current status Legal Every trans person in Uruguay has the right to access comprehensive gender-affirming care, including hormone therapy and surgical interventions, through the public healthcare system (SNIS), private healthcare providers, or a combination of both. For minors, access to gender-affirming care requires either the consent of their legal representatives or judicial authorization. In cases requiring judicial authorizations, the court must determine that the procedure is in the best interest of the minor before granting approval. When it comes to irreversible genital surgeries for minors, the consent of their legal representatives is mandatory. Law No. 19,684 2018 (Article 19-21) guarantees the training of a team specialized in gender identity and sexual diversity, informed consent, data confidentiality, access to relevant information/guidance/advice, and a collaborative decision-making process. It also prohibits discrimination in healthcare, ensuring equal access for all. Details Sources: www.impo.com.uy/bases/leyes&hellip; (Article 19-21) www.loc.gov/item/global-leg&hellip; Report error · Log Legal recognition of non-binary gender in Montevideo ? Legal recognition of non-binary gender in Montevideo is ambiguous. Current status Ambiguous Non-binary people are recognized in its definitions by law, but there is no third gender marker option available for ID documents. However in 2023 , the governing council of the University of the Republic (Udelar) in Uruguay has approved the implementation of a non-binary option on their degree titles. The non-binary option allows individuals who do not identify strictly as male or female to be represented accurately on their academic credentials. This decision is significant as it reflects a broader societal shift towards recognizing and respecting non-binary gender identities. Details Sources: montevideo.gub.uy/sites/def&hellip; database.ilga.org/uruguay-lgbti bnn.network/breaking-news/e&hellip; Report error · Log Hate crime protections in Montevideo ? Hate crime protections in Montevideo is sexual orientation and gender identity. Current status Since Jul 9, 2003 Sexual orientation and gender identity In 2003 , Uruguay passed Law 17,677 which prohibited hate crimes and incitement to hate on the basis of both sexual orientation and gender identity. Details Sources: futurefreespeech.org/global&hellip; www.gub.uy/ministerio-desar&hellip; Report error · Log LGBT discrimination in Montevideo ? LGBT discrimination in Montevideo is illegal. Current status Since Sep 14, 2004 Illegal In 2004 , an official anti-discrimination bill was passed that includes provisions for sexual orientations and gender identities in all areas. The law is actively enforced. Details Sources: iglhrc.org/content/uruguay-&hellip; www0.parlamento.gub.uy/leye&hellip; www.state.gov/reports/2023-&hellip; www.impo.com.uy/bases/leyes&hellip; Report error · Log Jul 9, 2003 –Sep 13, 2004 Illegal in some contexts In 2003 , Uruguay passed Law 17,677 which prohibited hate crimes and incitement to hate on the basis of both sexual orientation and gender identity. Details Sources: www.gub.uy/ministerio-desar&hellip; Report error · Log Until Jul 8, 2003 No protections Until 2003 , there were no protections from discrimination provided to LGBTIQ+ people in Uruguay. Details Sources: www.gub.uy/ministerio-desar&hellip; Report error · Log LGBT employment discrimination in Montevideo ? LGBT employment discrimination in Montevideo is sexual orientation and gender identity. Current status Since Sep 14, 2004 Sexual orientation and gender identity In 2004 , Uruguay passed Law 17,817 which prohibited discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity in employment. Details Sources: www.impo.com.uy/bases/leyes&hellip; Report error · Log Until Sep 13, 2004 No protections Until 2004 , there were no protections from discrimination in employment provided to LGBTIQ+ people in Uruguay. Details Sources: www.impo.com.uy/bases/leyes&hellip; Report error · Log LGBT housing discrimination in Montevideo ? LGBT housing discrimination in Montevideo is sexual orientation and gender identity. Current status Since Sep 14, 2004 Sexual orientation and gender identity In 2004 , Uruguay passed Law 17,817 which prohibited discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity in housing. Details Sources: www.impo.com.uy/bases/leyes&hellip; Report error · Log Until Sep 13, 2004 No protections Until 2004 , there were no protections from discrimination in housing provided to LGBTIQ+ people in Uruguay. Details Sources: www.impo.com.uy/bases/leyes&hellip; Report error · Log Same-sex adoption in Montevideo ? Same-sex adoption in Montevideo is legal. Current status Since Sep 14, 2004 Legal In 2009 , Uruguay became the first Latin American country to allow same-sex couples to adopt children when they were explicitly granted equal rights to different-sex couples in adoption. However, adoption was in practice already allowed since 2004 . Details Sources: www.cnn.com/2009/WORLD/amer&hellip; www.lanacion.com.ar/1172501&hellip; www.impo.com.uy/bases/codig&hellip; Report error · Log Until Sep 13, 2004 Single only Until 2004 , only LGBTIQ+ singles could adopt in Uruguay. Details Sources: www.impo.com.uy/bases/codig&hellip; web.archive.org/web/2011102&hellip; Report error · Log Intersex infant surgery in Montevideo ? Intersex infant surgery in Montevideo is full ban. Current status Since Jan 9, 2018 Full ban Unnecessary medical procedures for intersex children and adolescents have been prohibited since January 2018 by Article 22 of Law No. 19,580. Details Sources: www.impo.com.uy/bases/leyes&hellip; Report error · Log Until Jan 8, 2018 Not banned Until 2018 , surgery on intersex infants was legal in Uruguay. Details Sources: www.impo.com.uy/bases/leyes&hellip; Report error · Log Serving openly in military in Montevideo ? Serving openly in military in Montevideo is legal. Current status Since May 15, 2009 Legal In 2009 , Uruguay lifted the ban on LGBTIQ+ people joining the armed forces imposed by the 1973 -85 military dictatorship. Details Sources: www.bbc.co.uk/mundo/america&hellip; web.archive.org/web/2009051&hellip; Report error · Log 1973 –May 14, 2009 Illegal In 1973 , the Uruguayan military dictatorship passed a ban on people with "open sexual deviations" from joining the military, which included LGBTIQ+ people. Details Sources: web.archive.org/web/2009051&hellip; Report error · Log Dec 4, 1933 – 1973 Legal Until 1973 , there was no known ban or restriction on LGBTIQ+ people serving in the military of Uruguay. Details Sources: web.archive.org/web/2009051&hellip; Report error · Log Blood donations by MSMs in Montevideo ? Blood donations by MSMs in Montevideo is legal. Current status Since Dec 16, 2020 Legal From December 16, 2020 , the rules changed, and now Gay men can donate blood under the same conditions as the rest of the population. Details Sources: www.montevideo.com.uy/Notic&hellip; Report error · Log 2000 –Dec 16, 2020 Banned (1-year deferral) Gay and bisexual men could donate blood in Uruguay, provided they hadn't had sex for 12 months. Details Sources: distintaslatitudes.net/dona&hellip; Report error · Log Until 2000 Legal Until 2000 , there was no known ban or restriction on blood donations from men who have sex with men in Uruguay. Details Sources: distintaslatitudes.net/expl&hellip; Report error · Log Bathroom access in Montevideo ? Bathroom access in Montevideo is protected. Current status Since Oct 26, 2018 Protected Uruguay’s Integral Law for Trans People allows transgender people to use the bathrooms corresponding with their gender identity. Details Sources: womensmediacenter.com/fbomb&hellip; Report error · Log Conversion therapy in Montevideo ? Conversion therapy in Montevideo is banned. Current status Since Sep 19, 2017 Banned In 2017 , Uruguay implemented a mental health law that covers the ban on conversion therapy under Law 19,529. Details Sources: www.stonewall.org.uk/about-&hellip; www.impo.com.uy/bases/leyes&hellip; Report error · Log Until Sep 18, 2017 Not banned Until 2017 , conversion therapy was legal in Uruguay. Details Sources: www.impo.com.uy/bases/leyes&hellip; Report error · Log Equal age of consent in Montevideo ? Equal age of consent in Montevideo is equal. Current status Since Dec 4, 1933 Equal The age of consent in Uruguay is 15 years old regardless of the type of intercourse. Details Sources: www0.parlamento.gub.uy/Codi&hellip; Report error · Log Equality Index ? 87 / 100 Legal Rights 100 / 100 This region's Equality Index is based on legal rights alone. Please submit survey results that show the public opinion of LGBTQ+ issues in Montevideo to help improve its accuracy. Top Contributors DaisyGeekyTrans 30 contributions danlev 6 contributions vviet93 6 contributions Aletheia 3 contributions chae 3 contributions Doomdorm64 3 contributions celoafonso 3 contributions Ro_Guy 2 contributions Nathan 2 contributions Notdog1996 2 contributions Montevideo LGBT Organizations There are no organizations listed in Montevideo. Suggest one Share Region Compare Montevideo 87 Compare with Rivera, Uruguay 87 Compare with Maldonado, Uruguay 87 Compare with Paysandú, Uruguay 87 Compare with Tacuarembó, Uruguay 87 Compare with Rocha, Uruguay 87 Compare with Treinta y Tres, Uruguay 87 Compare with Artigas, Uruguay 87 Compare with Flores, Uruguay Common queries: Is it illegal to be gay in Montevideo? Is homosexuality legal in Montevideo? Is gay marriage legal in Montevideo? LGBT Rights in 87 LGBT Rights in Rivera 87 LGBT Rights in Maldonado 87 LGBT Rights in Paysandú 87 LGBT Rights in Tacuarembó 87 LGBT Rights in Rocha 87 LGBT Rights in Treinta y Tres 87 LGBT Rights in Artigas 87 LGBT Rights in Flores 87 LGBT Rights in Durazno 87 LGBT Rights in Río Negro 87 LGBT Rights in Soriano 87 LGBT Rights in Salto 87 LGBT Rights in San José 87 LGBT Rights in Florida 87 LGBT Rights in Lavalleja Consensual sexual activity between individuals of the same sex. Marriage and marriage recognition between two people of the same biological sex and/or gender identity. Censorship or prohibition of discussing, promoting, or teaching LGBTQ+ topics in media, schools, and in the general public. Legal recognition of a change in gender by permitting a change on an individual's legal documentation. Medical and psychological support designed to help individuals transition to the gender they identify with, including hormone replacement therapy (HRT) and surgeries. Legal recognition of non-binary, genderqueer, or third gender identities. Legal protection from hate crimes based on sexual orientation and gender identity. Prohibition of discrimination based on sexual orientation and/or gender identity. Prohibition of discrimination based on sexual orientation and/or gender identity in employment, including hiring, promotion, termination, harassment, etc. Prohibition of discrimination based on sexual orientation and/or gender identity when applying for housing or discrimination by landlords / property owners. The ability for same-sex couples to legally adopt a child. Medical interventions performed on intersex infants to alter their genital appearance to conform to typical male or female standards, often without the informed consent of the child who is too young to participate in the decision-making process. The ability for homosexuals to serve in the military and be open about their sexuality. The ability for MSMs (men who have sex with men) to donate blood or tissue for organ transplants. A deferral period refers to a waiting time before a man can donate after having sex. Legislation restricting access to public restrooms and other sex-segregated facilities based on a person's sex assigned at birth rather than their gender identity, typically barring transgender people from using facilities matching their gender identity. Legal status of conducting sexual orientation changing therapy ("ex-gay" therapy) The difference between legal age of consent for homosexual sex and heterosexual sex. Discord Twitter Facebook Instagram LinkedIn About Feedback Press API Donate Terms Privacy Cookie Preferences Directory Copyright © 2026 Equaldex. All rights reserved. Equaldex is a collaborative knowledge base crowdsourcing LGBT (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender) rights by country and region. Sign Up to contribute!