Exploding pipe bomb thrown through transgender woman's window while she watched TV in 'hate crime' attack - The Mirror ‌ ‌ Skip to main content The Mirror: The Heart of Britain News Celebs Football Lifestyle More News UK News Politics Opinion Royals Real life Crime Weather US News World news Weird News Got A Story? MIRROR+ Mirror+ Exclusives Mirror+ Rewards Mirror+ Newsletters Celebs TV Emmerdale Coronation Street Films Hollywood Pride of Britain I'm A Celebrity Partner Stories Horoscopes Online Games Crossword Solitaire Sudoku Mahjong Bingo Sport Football Boxing UFC Cricket Rugby Union Rugby League F1 Racing Golf Athletics Darts Snooker US Sports Betting Lifestyle Family Health Sex & Relationships Money Gardening Shopping Fashion & Beauty Food & Drink Motoring Tech Gaming Travel UK & Ireland Europe USA & Canada Caribbean Africa Cruises Cheap Flights Asia & Middle East Australia & New Zealand Central & South America Check out our editions: UK US ES-US IRE CLOSE InYourArea Funeral Notices Shop Competitions Offers Newsletter Signup Follow us on social Check out our editions: UK US ES-US IRE News UK News Politics Opinion Royals Real life Crime Weather US News World news Weird News Got A Story? MIRROR+ Mirror+ Exclusives Mirror+ Rewards Mirror+ Newsletters Celebs TV Emmerdale Coronation Street Films Hollywood Pride of Britain I'm A Celebrity Partner Stories Horoscopes Online Games Crossword Solitaire Sudoku Mahjong Bingo Sport Football Boxing UFC Cricket Rugby Union Rugby League F1 Racing Golf Athletics Darts Snooker US Sports Betting Lifestyle Family Health Sex & Relationships Money Gardening Shopping Fashion & Beauty Food & Drink Motoring Tech Gaming Travel UK & Ireland Europe USA & Canada Caribbean Africa Cruises Cheap Flights Asia & Middle East Australia & New Zealand Central & South America InYourArea Funeral Notices Shop Competitions Offers Newsletter Signup Follow us on social News UK News Hospitals Exploding pipe bomb thrown through transgender woman's window while she watched TV in 'hate crime' attack Rachael Keys, 27, has been forced to live with friends after what the police described as a “sectarian hate crime” News LEONA O'NEILL 22:58, 04 Oct 2015 Updated 23:35, 04 Oct 2015 Rachael Keys: Her house in Derry’s Waterside was pipebombed last night (Image: Trevor McBride) A transgender woman has told how her home was pipebombed last night in what is suspected to be a targeted attack. ‌ Rachael Keys says she is now staying with friends until being emergency rehoused tomorrow, Belfast Live reports. ‌ The 27-year-old's home, in the Lincoln Court area of Belfast, was pipebombed shortly after 10pm on Saturday night in what the police described as a “sectarian hate crime”. ‌ A device left on the windowsill of the property exploded, smashing a window and showering her with glass. Five properties were evacuated and residents were forced to sleep in a local community centre. “I was just watching TV in my living room,” said the 27-year-old. “Suddenly the window came through, there was glass everywhere and there was a big bang and a flash. I was covered in glass. Attack: The 27-year-old was watching TV when the horrifying attack took place (Image: Trevor McBride) ‌ “To be honest I was completely dazed, I didn’t know what was happening. It scared the life out of me. I just ran out of the house screaming to my neighbours. "I didn’t even have time to lift my poor cat, Jessie, who was sleeping in the bedroom. I was terrified, shaking, upset. Family claim they are being driven out of their home after converting from Islam to Christianity “The police came and cordoned the place off and evacuated us all to the community centre. I was totally dazed. ‌ “One of my neighbours is epileptic and I was really worried about her not being able to get her medication. Another neighbour has a child who is autistic, another is a pensioner. It was awful for them. Just awful. “We all had to sleep in the community centre overnight. I was distraught. Someone gave me a tablet to help calm me down and help me sleep. I didn’t sleep though.” Rachael said she had just moved to the area at the end of last year and was gradually getting her home decorated how she wanted it. ‌ “I just moved into my home in December,” she added. “It is a quiet area. I liked living here. I was getting my place done up bit by bit. It was my home. You think you’ll be safe in your home, that it is a sanctuary, but this has just shown me that it isn’t. “The police told me I can’t go back home. They said I am to be moved to emergency housing and will be rehoused tomorrow. “It makes me really sad that people won’t allow others to get on with their lives, to live in peace. It makes me sad and angry. It’s not fair, it’s not right. I don’t deserve this, I’ve done nothing wrong.” ‌ Shocking footage shows taxi passenger hurling racist abuse and spitting at driver Police are investigating a motive but Rachael said she feels the attack may be linked to her being Transgender. Attack: Police believe the pipebomb attack was targeted (Image: Trevor McBride) “I am a member of the LGBT community,” she added. “The police feel that I may have been attacked because of that reason. ‌ “I just don’t think this has all sunk in with me yet. I am completely dazed, numb. This is another stressful situation to face. “I am not long out of hospital. I have a tumour on my bowel and am having tests and treatment at the moment. I do not need this extra stress in my life. I have done nothing wrong.” SDLP Councillor for the area, Gerard Diver, who visited the victim this morning, condemned the attack. ‌ He said: “Sadly we have a history of people being attacked in their homes over the years in this city and district and it’s unbelievable that this type of sinister event can still happen in 2015. Homeless: Rachael is hoping to find a new home tomorrow (Image: Trevor McBride) “My complete sympathy is with the victim of this attack who thankfully has escaped physical harm but who I’m sure has been traumatised by the events. Article continues below Manchester City fans accused of subjecting schoolboy to vile racist abuse on train “I would appeal for anyone with information to pass it on to the PSNI as a matter of urgency so that those responsible can be brought to justice.” A PSNI detective said: “We are lucky that no one was injured by this device, or by the window smashing. “This is being treated as a sectarian hate crime and I would appeal to anyone with any information about this incident to contact detectives at Strand Road police station on the non-emergency number 101.” ENJOYED THIS STORY? Choose Daily Mirror as a 'Preferred Source' on Google News for quick access to the news you value. ‌ ‌ ‌ Hospitals Crime Transgender Hate crime Transgender community News Politics Football TV Showbiz Weird News Family Sport Travel Life & Style Money Fashion Tech Mums Motoring Film Follow Daily Mirror on socials: Marketplace Find a job Shop InYourArea mynewsassistant Find a local business Style Store Beauty Box Subscription Mirror Bingo Yimbly Shop Online Games Crossword Solitaire Sudoku Mahjong Betting Free Bets Partner Stories About Us Contact Us Work for us Follow Us Sell Your Story Syndication & Licensing How to Complain Corrections & Clarifications Privacy Notice AI Notice Cookie Notice Terms and Conditions Notifications and alerts help Subscribe to Daily Mirror and Sunday Mirror newspapers Subscribe to tablet edition Newsletters preference centre Community Standards Irish Mirror Privacy Choices Do not sell or share my data © 2026 a Reach plc subsidiary ‌ At Reach and across our entities we and our partners use information collected through cookies and other identifiers from your device to improve experience on our site, analyse how it is used and to show personalised advertising. You can opt out of the sale or sharing of your data, at any time clicking the "Do Not Sell or Share my Data" button at the bottom of the webpage. Please note that your preferences are browser specific. Use of our website and any of our services represents your acceptance of the use of cookies and consent to the practices described in our Privacy Notice and Terms and Conditions . Accept Follow Daily Mirror: Facebook X (Twitter) TikTok Instagram Snapchat