Entry #14118: Homosexual activity in Sokoto | Equaldex Home Equality Index Issues Timeline Public Opinion More ▾ ⭐️ Rate Your Region Compare Organizations Editor Dashboard Help Login / Join Log Entry #14118: Homosexual activity in Sokoto Current Version Region Sokoto Issue Homosexual activity Status Illegal (death penalty as punishment) Start Date Jan 31, 2001 End Date (none) Description The Sharia Penal Code Law 2000 took effect in Sokoto on January 31st, 2001. Within the Penal Code, consensual same-sex sexual activity is punished with stoning to death. If the act is committed by a minor on an adult person the adult person shall be punished by way of ta'azir which may extend to 100 lashes and minor with correctional punishment. Sources http://www.sharia-in-africa.net/media/publications/sharia-implementation-in-northern-nigeria/vol_4_4_chapter_4_part_III.pdf Revision History (2) Jul 29, 2024 edited by UnknownMiles . removing sentence to match other regional entries Helpful? 0 Report Error Old Value (Original) New Value (Current) Description The Sharia Penal Code Law 2000 took effect in Sokoto on January 31st, 2001. It was the second Nigerian State to implement Sharia Law. Within the Penal Code, consensual same-sex sexual activity is punished with stoning to death. If the act is committed by a minor on an adult person the adult person shall be punished by way of ta'azir which may extend to 100 lashes and minor with correctional punishment. The Sharia Penal Code Law 2000 took effect in Sokoto on January 31st, 2001. Within the Penal Code, consensual same-sex sexual activity is punished with stoning to death. If the act is committed by a minor on an adult person the adult person shall be punished by way of ta'azir which may extend to 100 lashes and minor with correctional punishment. Show Difference The Sharia Penal Code Law 2000 took effect in Sokoto on January 31st, 2001. It was the second Nigerian State to implement Sharia Law. Within the Penal Code, consensual same-sex sexual activity is punished with stoning to death. If the act is committed by a minor on an adult person the adult person shall be punished by way of ta'azir which may extend to 100 lashes and minor with correctional punishment. 2001. Within the Penal Code, consensual same-sex sexual activity is punished with stoning to death. If the act is committed by a minor on an adult person the adult person shall be punished by way of ta'azir which may extend to 100 lashes and minor with correctional punishment. Jul 24, 2024 created by UnknownMiles Helpful? 0 Report Error Original entry Status Illegal (death penalty as punishment) Start Date Jan 31, 2001 End Date (none) Description The Sharia Penal Code Law 2000 took effect in Sokoto on January 31st, 2001. It was the second Nigerian State to implement Sharia Law. Within the Penal Code, consensual same-sex sexual activity is punished with stoning to death. If the act is committed by a minor on an adult person the adult person shall be punished by way of ta'azir which may extend to 100 lashes and minor with correctional punishment. Sources http://www.sharia-in-africa.net/media/publications/sharia-implementation-in-northern-nigeria/vol_4_4_chapter_4_part_III.pdf Discord Twitter Facebook Instagram LinkedIn About Feedback Press API Donate Terms Privacy Cookie Preferences Directory Copyright © 2026 Equaldex. All rights reserved. Equaldex is a collaborative knowledge base crowdsourcing LGBT (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender) rights by country and region. Sign Up to contribute!