Guyana | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Guyana At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? No Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Legal Gender Recognition Possible? No LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? Yes Last Update: March 12, 2026 Guyana is one of only five countries in the Western Hemisphere that still criminalize consensual same-sex conduct between adults as of 2026. Section 352 of the colonial-era Criminal Law Act of Guyana criminalizes “gross indecency” between men. Section 353 criminalizes attempted buggery and indecent assault, while Section 354 criminalizes buggery between men as well as between people of different genders and imposes life imprisonment for those found guilty. Though rarely enforced, the law contributes to ongoing negative perceptions of LGBTIQ people, facilitates their exclusion from legal and social policies, and leaves them vulnerable to stigma and discrimination. In 2025, five of the six political parties that contested the general election, including the ruling party, declared that they supported the call to decriminalize same-sex intimacy. Until 2018, Guyana also criminalized cross-dressing under Section 153(1)(xlvii) of the Summary Jurisdiction (Offences) Act, which unfairly targeted transgender people and was used to arrest trans women. This law was successfully challenged by activists in the case of McEwan et al. v. The Attorney General of Guyana . Section 153(1)(xlvii) was found to be unconstitutionally vague and contrary to the rule of law. Also in 2018, Guyana became the first country in the Anglophone Caribbean to host a Pride march, inspiring others to follow suit. Evangelical Christian groups have publicly opposed the human rights of LGBTIQ people. In 2024, civil society reported widespread discrimination against queer and trans people in Guyana in employment, education, health care, and public life. Despite this, a 2022 study showed that 72 percent of Guyanese people accepted or tolerated homosexual people. Compared to a 2013 poll, it found a 13 percent decline in negative attitudes toward LGBT persons. Intersex people in Guyana are largely made invisible by a lack of information. Nonconsensual medical interventions on intersex children are not prohibited, leaving them vulnerable to violence. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International