Italy | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Italy At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Legal Gender Recognition Possible? Yes LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? Yes Last Update: March 12, 2026 Italy is one of the least progressive countries on LGBTIQ issues in Western Europe. Same-sex couples may enter into civil unions that provide many of the same benefits as marriage, but they cannot adopt. Stepchild adoption remains available, but it is through a lengthy judicial procedure rather than codified legislation. In October 2024, Parliament approved new legislation classifying surrogacy under the umbrella of “universal crimes”—a type of offense typically applied to crimes like genocide or human trafficking—and extending penalties to Italian citizens who seek surrogacy abroad. Italy bans employment discrimination based on sexual orientation, but has enacted no other antidiscrimination laws regarding sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, and sex characteristics nationwide. Some Italian regions have enacted more comprehensive antidiscrimination laws. Transgender people may change their legal gender markers if they obtain a diagnosis of gender dysphoria and get court approval. In July 2024, the Constitutional Court declared the requirement of securing court authorization to undergo gender-affirming surgeries unconstitutional . In August 2025, the Council of Ministers of the Meloni government approved a bill restricting access to drugs for transgender minors. Under the pretext of “health protection,” it introduces a national registry, a political ethics committee, and hospital centralization, taking clinical decisions away from doctors and families. As of writing, it has not yet been considered by parliament. The current government has vowed to tackle the so-called LGBT lobby and gender ideology, including by limiting comprehensive sexuality education in schools. Major political leaders have made comments denigrating same-sex couples. Most Italians agree that same-sex couples should be allowed to marry and that transgender people should be able to change their legal gender markers. However, discrimination, violence, and bullying are prevalent. Hate crimes based on sexual orientation and gender identity, including rape, assault, murder, and beating, persist and have escalated since the new government assumed power. In 2024, after five years of monitoring the human rights situation in the country, the European Commission against Racism and Intolerance (ECRI) published a report highlighting an increase in hate speech against LGBTIQ people, as well as refugees and migrants. ​ The earliest demonstrations against homophobia in Italy date back to 1972, and LGBTIQ activists organized the first Pride event in 1994. While Pride has been growing since then, Pride organizers have also faced pushback in recent years , with the surge of anti-LGBTIQ rhetoric and the withdrawal of support by some local governments. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International