Bangladesh | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Bangladesh At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? No Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? No Legal Gender Recognition Possible? No LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? No Last Update: March 12, 2026 The Penal Code of Bangladesh, a colonial-era code dating back to 1860, outlaws “intercourse against the order of nature” and prescribes a penalty of life imprisonment. Although this law is rarely enforced, there have been reports of police using the law as a pretext to harass people they thought were LGBTIQ. Since 2014, Bangladesh has legally recognized hijra people as a third gender, allowing them to change their legal gender markers to reflect this status. In recent years, there have been LGBTIQ and hijra Pride events. Recently, Islamist groups have become vocal in their opposition to the legal recognition of hijras, with a professor from BRAC University in Dhaka setting off public backlash against gender diversity after publicly tearing a seventh-grade history and social science textbook because it contained a two-page story featuring a transgender character . Conservative religious views influence societal norms around gender and sexuality, and LGBTIQ people experience harassment, discrimination, social stigmatization, threats, and violence, including fatal attacks . Hijras have reported stigma, employment discrimination , and mistreatment, which often starts at school . Hijra , women , and queer activists took an active role in the July Revolution of 2024 that saw student-led protests oust incumbent Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina . Despite their visible presence at the student protests, the tenor of political discourse in the country under the caretaker government has taken a sharp turn toward religious conservatism, resulting in increasing violence against women and LGBTIQ people for not conforming to gender norms. Outright’s research in 2025 shows that lesbian, bisexual, and queer women in Bangladesh have been subjected to online gender-based violence, including sexualized harassment, hate speech, extortion, and threats from individuals and organized groups. Outright’s forthcoming research on the right to education also finds that LGBTIQ students in Bangladesh experienced sexual assault, physical acts of bullying, and discrimination at school. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International