Trans Model Says She Was Deported at Dubai Border Because of Her Male Passport Back to homepage Subscribe to VICE Get unlimited access to everything VICE has to offer. Digital Monthly $ 2.00 / month Turn off all ads on VICE.com Exclusive New VICE Documentaries Member Exclusive Features & Columns Join Now Digital Annual $ 20.00 / year Turn off all ads on VICE.com Exclusive New VICE Documentaries Member Exclusive Features & Columns Join Now Print & Digital $ 70.00 / year Turn off all ads on VICE.com Exclusive New VICE Documentaries Member Exclusive Features & Columns 4 Magazines Delivered to Your Door Join Now Skip to content + English Close VICE Editions English Bahasa Indonesia Czech Danish Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands Polish Portuguese Română Russian Srpski Swedish Ελληνικά عربي 日本語 한국어 Open Menu Close Menu Magazine Pulse Life Tech Munchies Music Waypoint Members Subscribe Newsletter Instagram TikTok YouTube Google Discover Video Members Facebook Instagram TikTok Reddit YouTube Google Discover Search Culture Pulse Tech Munchies Drugs Music Waypoint Photography Sex Travel via Comedy Entertainment Pulse Trans Model Says She Was Deported at Dubai Border Because of Her Male Passport By Koh Ewe March 21, 2022, 6:33am Share: Share on X (Opens in new window) X Share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Share using Native tools Share Copied to clipboard When Thai model Rachaya Noppakaroon arrived at Dubai International Airport with her team of 14, she was looking forward to putting up a grand performance at Expo 2020, where she was set to appear at a Muay Thai event. But despite possessing all the necessary travel documents, Noppakaroon never made it to the months-long world fair currently being held in the United Arab Emirates. After being unceremoniously stopped at immigration and interrogated at the airport for nine hours, she was allegedly forced to fly back to Thailand less than a day after she first touched down in Dubai. Videos by VICE In a Facebook post on March 16, the runner-up at the 2014 Miss Tiffany Universe—a beauty pageant for transgender women held in Pattaya, Thailand—said that UAE immigration officials turned her back because she lives as a female, but her passport states she is a male. “The reason is because I’m a woman, but I’m a man,” Noppakaroon wrote in her Facebook post, the details of which VICE World News was unable to independently verify. In the UAE, transgender people are not recognized and presenting as anything other than your birth sex is illegal. Describing the ordeal as a “nightmare during which I’m fully awake,” in her Facebook post Noppakaroon recounted how she was made to sit in the men’s waiting room and subjected to intrusive questions by an airport employee, such as whether she was able to have children, whether she had “done it all” and the size of her breasts. Noppakaroon tried her best to prove her identity by showing them clips of her work. “But he didn’t really care and was more interested in sex,” she wrote. Despite pushing through the interrogation, during which Noppakaroon says she broke down in tears, the model said that she was ultimately rejected at the border and made to return to Thailand. Members of the LGBTQ community face serious social and political challenges in the United Arab Emirates, where gay sex is punishable by up to 14 years in prison and crossdressing is punishable with up to one year in prison. In 2017, a transgender Singaporean woman and her friend were arrested in the capital Abu Dhabi and sentenced to a year in prison “for attempting to resemble women.” While the country’s commercial hub of Dubai is known to be more liberal, there have also been reports of transgender individuals being prosecuted or turned away at its airport. In 2016, Canadian YouTuber Gigi Gorgeous was similarly denied entry into Dubai for being transgender. For Noppakaroon, who said that she still finds herself in tears because of her distressing experience, it was hard to accept that she would not be able to perform at Expo 2020. But despite the intrusive and inappropriate questions she faced at the airport, Noppakaroon’s post noted that there were employees who were kind to her, including one who tried to look out for her safety and expressed sympathy. Known for its vibrant transgender community, gender-affirming surgery and transgender culture is widespread in Thailand. However, rights groups still point to the fact that the country is lagging in transgender recognition and welfare. A major structural barrier facing transgender people in Thailand is that while they are allowed to change their legal name, there remains no option for them to change their gender on official documents. Read Next Thailand Is Sweeping Sexual Abuse in Its Schools Under the Rug In a report released in December 2021, Human Rights Watch noted that the lack of legal gender recognition means that transgender people in Thailand have to hold identity documents that list a different gender from their lived identity—often a source of humiliation or harassment when these documents have to be assessed publicly, like in Noppakaroon’s case. “We don’t blame Dubai employees at all (but we’re angry),” Noppakaroon said in her Facebook post, adding that she blames the Thai authorities for not providing pathways for transgender people to change their passports. “I hope they will see that it’s something that needs to be fixed.” Follow Koh Ewe on Twitter and Instagram . Tagged: dubai , LGBTQ , Thailand , transgender , UAE , worldnews Follow Us On Discover Add to Preferred Sources Share: Share on X (Opens in new window) X Share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Share using Native tools Share Copied to clipboard More Like This (Photo by Paul Bergen/Redferns/Getty Images) The Night Nirvana Defied MTV, Trashed the Stage, and Made VMA History 2 hours ago By Caleb Catlin (Photo by Johnny Nunez/Getty Images for The Recording Academy) Kendrick Lamar Once Recalled How Jay-Z Signed Him to Def Jam Long Before His Breakthrough: ‘I Wasn’t Ready’ 3 hours ago By Caleb Catlin (Photo by Jeff Kravitz/FilmMagic, Inc) New Report Suggests Kurt Cobain’s Death Was Actually a Homicide the Entire Time 4 hours ago By Caleb Catlin (Photo by Kevin Kane/Getty Images for RRHOF) Born 42 Years Ago Today, the Canadian Pop-Punk Superstar That Conspiracy Theorists Believed Was Replaced by a Body Double 5 hours ago By Caleb Catlin Screenshot: Rockstar Games, Game Informer Rockstar Reveals New GTA 6 Artwork of Jason and Lucia 6 hours ago By Brent Koepp (Photo by Allen J. Schaben / Los Angeles Times via Getty Images) My Chemical Romance’s New Album and Tour May Have Just Leaked 7 hours ago By Caleb Catlin More From VICE The Simple Habit That Could Make You More Disciplined (and How to Do It) 7 hours ago By Ashley Fike 4 Signs Your Phone Addiction Is Really Starting to Mess Up Your Body 7 hours ago By Ashley Fike Introducing ‘Soft Socializing,’ the Social Trend That Lets You Connect Without Feeling Drained 7 hours ago By Sammi Caramela Screenshot: Epic Games FNAF Fortnite Collab Confirmed by Epic Games – Release Date, Skins and Mode Revealed 7 hours ago By Brent Koepp Instagram TikTok YouTube About Accessibility Privacy Policy Terms of Use Security Policy Fulfillment Policy © 2026 VICE Digital Publishing, LLC × Kill the ads for just $2 a month VICE membership also gives you access to our very best writing and exclusive new documentaries. Support for $2 See All Membership Plans Or, continue for free Thank for your puchase! You have successfully purchased. OK × Add your account details Next