Same sex couples can now officially marry in Greenland | PinkNews About Us Advertise Work with us Login Register Latest News View all UK US World Health Politics Sport Business Culture View all TV Film Celebrity Drag Theatre Music Gaming Lifestyle View all Beauty Careers Fashion Relationships Travel Shopping View all Deals Recommended Fashion & Beauty Tickets Video View all News & Politics Entertainment Lifestyle Discover Trans Awareness Week Drag Race Explainers The Queer Agenda Toggle menu Account Register Login World Same sex couples can now officially marry in Greenland Apr 01 2016 Written by Joe Williams Share Save for later Comment Greenland’s same-sex marriage law comes into effect today. Same sex couples can now officially marry in Greenland, as the Marriage Act comes into effect after being unanimously voted in favour of last year. MPs in the country, which has a population of 57,000, voted to adopt Danish legislation on the issue. Queer News. Straight Up. The LGBTQ+ stories you don’t want to miss, delivered to your inbox daily. Email address required Must be valid email Register By registering you agree to our Privacy Policy Thanks for registering! You can update your email subscriptions at any time in the My profile section of your account. The new measure will now scrap Greenland’s domestic partnership laws, adopted from Denmark in 1996. The bill to make the changes to bring Greenland in line with Denmark, which legalised same-sex marriage in 2012, was announced last February and was originally supposed to go into effect in October. It lapsed due to Denmark’s summer parliamentary elections. However, a second, almost-identical bill was submitted to parliament in October 2015 and was once again passed unanimously, receiving Royal Assent in early February. Nivi Olson, the Minister for the Church, said: “We have long waited for this day. “To have the opportunity to enter into marriage means a lot to many couples regardless of the gender of one’s partner.” Greenland’s Bishop Sofie Petersen – the province’s top religious figure – worked closely with the government to ensure the law would allow same-sex couples to marry in churches and other religious buildings. The joint adoption clause included in Greenland’s new Marriage Act will go into effect on July 1. Nov 29 2023 56 celebrities you didn’t know are gay, bisexual or lesbian Greenland in 2008 introduced discrimination protection for gay people, and in 2010 held its first gay pride event. More: adoption Denmark Europe Gay greenland LGBT same sex marriage Related articles Europe Sep 01 Poland officially starts legally recognising foreign same-sex marriages Europe Jul 30 Poland’s top court overturns plan to recognise EU same-sex marriages Europe Jul 20 Polish president blocks bill that would have granted rights to same-sex couples Europe May 13 Poland PM vows to prioritise recognising foreign same-sex marriages Europe Mar 23 Polish court rules foreign same-sex marriages must be recognised Latest News Previous Next Celebrity Sep 25 Trans influencer calls out Nikki Glaser for stand-up joke about what’s ‘in her pants’ Culture Sep 25 Trans pro wrestling trailblazer Gisele Shaw signs exclusive NWA contract Bisexual Sep 25 The Traitors star Freddie Fraser’s mum’s emotional response to his coming out Celebrity Sep 25 Lili Reinhart says Hollywood ‘too afraid’ to greenlight lesbian vampire project Celebrity Sep 25 Carly Rae Jepsen describes moment Heated Rivalry inspired her son’s name Celebrity Sep 25 John Green ‘heartbroken’ for trans Harry Potter fans as he talks JK Rowling Current Affairs Sep 25 JD Vance claims James Talarico has a “weird obsession with children in drag” News Sep 25 Susan Sarandon, Hannah Einbinder and Caleb Hearon detained outside UN after protesting Netanyahu What to buy now Previous Next Fashion Mar 27 Connor Ives and MAC team up to re-release the iconic ‘Protect The Dolls’ t-shirt Music Mar 12 The Pussycat Dolls confirm reunion with new single and tour – how to get tickets Music Jan 23 A full guide to the 2026 Harry Styles Together, Together tour including dates and presale info Shopping Nov 24 2025 Ten truly awesome Christmas gifts you can buy to support queer-owned businesses Trans Sep 09 2025 Lush creates ‘luxurious’ trans flag bath bomb to support trans charities Tickets Jun 25 2025 Dolly Parton announces mini Las Vegas residency after wrapping her last tour almost a decade ago Shopping May 15 2025 LEGO celebrates late gay icon Keith Haring with new art set: ‘Want this so bad’ Music Apr 18 2025 Primavera Sound’s most iconic queer performances, from Troye Sivan to Ethel Cain Exclusive Previous Next Exclusive Sep 11 Ania Magliano talks SNL UK season two and anti-LGBTQ voices in comedy: ‘We do edgy in the right way’ Exclusive Sep 11 Elliot Tuttle on Blue Film’s personal inspiration, rejection and taboo: ‘It’s about loneliness’ Exclusive Sep 09 OF star Andy Lee on love for gay fans, ‘poisonous’ creators and ‘harmful’ stunts: ‘Gay men lift me up every day’ Exclusive Sep 07 Real Housewives of London spill the tea: ‘She’d go to the opening of a packet of crisps’ Opinion Sep 04 Katseye in London: A showcase of real talent deserving of the deafening screams Exclusive Sep 02 Adrian Chiarella and Joe Bird on tackling conversion therapy in gay horror Leviticus Exclusive Aug 21 Sziget Festival drag and circus troupe want audiences to feel like family Exclusive Aug 20 Gay wrestler Anthony Bowens says Heated Rivalry shows authentic life of closeted athletes Register to save articles and more. It'll only take a minute and it's free. JOIN US TODAY! Already have an account? Log in here "/> Download the PinkNews app Award winning LGBTQ+ journalism About us Editorial Policy Contact us Advertise Work for us Terms and conditions Privacy policy Privacy manager Privacy Manager