Responses to Information Requests - Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada Skip to main content Skip to "About this site" Language selection Français Search Search Search Search and menus Search and menus Topics menu Refugee claims Refugee protection claim process Forms Procedures and practice notices Policy instruments Legal resources Decisions Act, rules and regulations Refugee claims - More Refugee appeals Filing a refugee appeal or responding to a Minister's appeal Forms Procedures and practice notices Policy instruments Legal resources Decisions Act, rules and regulations Refugee appeals - More Immigration appeals Making an immigration appeal Forms Procedures and practice notices Policy instruments Legal resources Act, rules and regulations Initiatives Immigration appeals - More Detention reviews / Admissibility hearings Preparing for detention reviews and admissibility hearings Forms Policy instruments Act, rules and regulations Procedures and practice notices Detention reviews and Admissibility hearings - More You are here: Home Country of Origin Information Responses to Information Requests Responses to Information Requests Page Content ​​​​​​​Responses to Information Requests ( RIR s) are research reports on country conditions. They are requested by IRB decision-makers. The database contains a seven-year archive of English and French RIR s. Earlier RIR s may be found on the European Country of Origin Information Network website. RIR ​s published by the IRB on its website may have attachments that are inaccessible due to technical constraints and may include translations of documents originally written in languages other than English or French. To obtain a copy of such attachments and/or translated version of the RIR attachments, please email us .​ Related Links Advanced search help Disclaimer Disclaimer Responses to Information Requests ( RIR s) cite publicly accessible information available at the time of publication and within time constraints. A list of references and additional sources consulted are included in each RIR . Sources cited are considered the most current information available as of the date of the RIR . RIR s are not, and do not purport to be, conclusive as to the merit of any particular claim for refugee protection. Rather, they are intended to support the refugee determination process. More information on the methodology used by the Research Directorate can be found here . The assessment and weight to be given to the information in the RIR s are the responsibility of independent IRB members (decision-makers) after considering the evidence and arguments presented by the parties. The information presented in RIR s solely reflects the views and perspectives of the sources cited and does not necessarily reflect the position of the IRB or the Government of Canada. 23 March 2017 GNQ105775.E Equatorial Guinea: Situation of sexual minorities, including treatment by society and authorities; recourse and state protection available to victims (2014-March 2017) Research Directorate, Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada, Ottawa 1. Legislation 1.1 Same-Sex Sexual Acts Sources report that same-sex sexual acts in Equatorial Guinea are legal (ILGA May 2016, 34; Huffington Post 31 Jul. 2010) or that same-sex relationships are "not criminalized" (HRC and Human Rights First 29 Jul. 2014, 8). The US Department of State travel advisory states that "there are no legal restrictions on same-sex sexual relations" in Equatorial Guinea (US 14 Feb. 2017). According to a report on sexual orientation and gender identity in countries around the world by the French Institute for International and Strategic Affairs (IRIS), a "French think tank on geopolitical and strategic issues" (IRIS n.d.), the legality of homosexuality in 13 countries, including Equatorial Guinea, [translation] "does not result from specific legislation but from a legal vacuum[,] …from the absence of legislation on the subject" (IRIS Nov. 2012, 5). In contrast, the United Kingdom (UK) travel advisory for Equatorial Guinea reports that "some sexual acts between members of the same sex are illegal" (UK 30 Nov. 2016). The Canadian government travel advisory for Equatorial Guinea similarly reports, with regard to homosexuality, that "displays of intimate affection are illegal" (Canada 22 Feb. 2017). The International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and Intersex Association (ILGA) notes in their 2016 State-Sponsored Homophobia report that the age of consent is equal for "same and different sex sexual acts" in Equatorial Guinea (ILGA May 2016, 38). Corroborating information could not be found among the sources consulted by the Research Directorate within the time constraints of this Response. 1.2 Freedom of Expression The US travel advisory for Equatorial Guinea indicates that there are "no legal restrictions on…the organization of LGBTI events" (US 14 Feb. 2017). Further and corroborating information could not be found among the sources consulted by the Research Directorate within the time constraints of this Response. 1.3 Anti-Discrimination In its national report to the UN Human Rights Council as part of the Universal Periodic Review (UPR), the government of Equatorial Guinea notes that, [w]ith regard to the prohibition of discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, heterosexuality and homosexuality are considered on an equal footing in Equatorial Guinea. The working paper from the Ministry of Health, which addresses sexual and reproductive rights, stipulates that all persons are entitled to the enjoyment of such rights without discrimination as to sexual orientation. (UN 3 Feb. 2014, para. 32) The same source further indicates that "Article 15.1 of the Constitution is more explicit, and sets out that discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation is an offence punishable by law" (UN 3 Feb. 2014, para. 32). Article 15.1 of the constitution of Equatorial Guinea provides the following Any act of bias [ parcialidad ] or of discrimination duly substantiated for tribal, ethnic, sexual, religious, social, political or other analogous motives, is punishable or castigated by the Law. (Republic of Equatorial Guinea 1982, italics in original) In contrast, the US travel advisory for Equatorial Guinea indicates that "no antidiscrimination law exists to protect LGBTI individuals" (US 14 Feb. 2017). 2. Treatment by Society and Authorities The US Department of State Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 notes that "[s]ocietal discrimination against…the lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and intersex (LGBTI) community…was a problem" in Equatorial Guinea (US 3 Mar. 2017, 1). The US travel advisory for Equatorial Guinea notes that "societal norms do not allow for the public discussion of homosexuality" (US 14 Feb. 2017). Similarly, the UK and Canadian travel advisories for Equatorial Guinea indicate that "homosexuality is not widely accepted" (Canada 22 Feb. 2017; UK 30 Nov. 2016). Without providing further detail, IRIS reports that there is "stigmatisation" of sexual orientation or gender identity issues in Equatorial Guinea, adding that "rare cases of denouncement" are attributed to "'white expatriates' or nationals who have been perverted by them" (IRIS Nov. 2012, 25). US Country Reports 2016 indicates that "[t]he official government position was that no LGBTI persons were present in the country and that such sexual orientation or gender identity was abnormal" (US 3 Mar. 2017, 26). In a July 2014 article from Diario Rombe , a news source that aims to [translation] "offer alternative content" to the mainstream media in Equatorial Guinea, and which is "edited by activists, bloggers and communication professionals" ( Diario Rombe 4 June 2013), cites the president of Equatorial Guinea as saying the following regarding homosexuality at a press conference: I believe that this new dynamic is a long way away from the sensible judgment of the Africans. We Africans are not in agreement with this system, because it is ABOMINABLE. It is very bad. It is not appropriate to speak of homosexuality in Africa and it is something that should be condemned. We absolutely do not accept that two men can marry, nor two women. This is not natural in human life. God created the sexes so that a woman would have a man and so that a man would have a woman. This is the reality and in Africa we should not discuss it because it could create a crisis… ( Diario Rombe 9 July 2014, emphasis in original) US Country Reports 2014 notes that during 2014, "RTVGE and Television Asonga broadcast news segments in which LGBT persons were publicly 'shamed' and forced to stand in front of the camera and explain their 'wrong actions'" (US 25 June 2015, 23). In their July 2014 article, Diario Rombe similarly indicates that Television station Asonga de Bata has been "exposing and laughing at several Guinean citizens regarding their sexual orientation" ( Diario Rombe 9 July 2014). According to the article, TV Asonga reported that four youths were detained and accused of being homosexuals ( Diario Rombe 9 July 2014). The Advocate , a US-based "gay magazine" ( The Advocate n.d.), citing the Diario Rombe article and YouTube report, describes the Asonga television news report as showing four youths, 18 to 20 years of age, who were arrested in July 2014 for "practicing homosexuality" and who were "forced to explain on national television" why they had filmed a video of two of their group having sex ( The Advocate 14 Jul. 2014). Association France-Guinée Équatoriale ( Assofrage ) [1], based on Diario Rombe and Asonga TV information, reports that the four youths were detained [translation] "on the grounds" of being homosexuals after police found a video of "homosexual acts" on one of their phones, and that the four youths were questioned on camera by the TV station Asonga about the video ( Assofrage 10 July 2014). Assofrage further reports that the four individuals incurred penalties because "Equatorial Guinea, like other African countries, continues to criminalize homosexuality and consider it a sexual deviance capable of endangering social order" ( Assofrage 10 Jul. 2014). In an April 2014 article, Assofrage reports that a taxi driver was arrested by police in Equatorial Guinea "for homosexuality," as he was in his car with "a young transvestite", as shown in a report on television station Asonga ( Assofrage 13 Apr. 2014). The same source indicates that in the Asonga report, the two men's faces are "clumsily" covered in the television report, and at several points, their features can be clearly seen ( Assofrage 13 Apr. 2014). According to Assofrage , in the TV report, the young transvestite, while "interrogated by journalists", explains that he was with the taxi driver "so he can eat," and the taxi driver indicates that he agreed to paid sexual services; however, it was not clear whether the driver knew that "he was dealing with a young man wearing a wig" ( Assofrage 13 Apr. 2014). A Diario Rombe article about the same incident states that "this is the reality of life in Equatorial Guinea and other African countries: homosexuals and transvestites are subjected to severe persecution" ( Diario Rombe 7 Apr. 2014). Corroborating information could not be found among the sources consulted by the Research Directorate within the time constraints of this Response. The US Country Reports 2014 states that RTVGE is "the only national radio and television broadcast system" in Equatorial Guinea and is government-owned, while Asonga is the only private broadcaster in the country, and is owned by the President's son (US 25 June 2015, 11). Assofrage similarly indicates that Asonga is owned by the son of the president ( Assofrage 13 Apr. 2014). US Country Reports 2015 states that in November 2014, [W]hen a military man saw a woman whom he liked holding hands with another woman, he shot and killed her on the street. Fearing government reluctance to punish the perpetrator, the victim's family decided against filing charges, and no action was taken. (US 13 Apr. 2016, 27) US Country Reports 2016 indicates that in Equatorial Guinea in 2016 there were no publicized incidents of official discrimination against LGBTI persons. In what might indicate more government and public tolerance toward LGBTI individuals, in June a local organization held a weeklong series of events on LGBTI issues. Speakers flown in from abroad gave lectures, workshops, film screenings, and television and radio interviews on government-controlled stations. All activities during the week were well attended and covered by local media, with no reported violence or societal backlash. (US 3 Mar. 2017, 26) However, the report also notes that "observers believed" that stigma surrounding LGBTI issues prevented the reporting of abuse (US 3 Mar. 2017, 26). Further and corroborating information could not be found among the sources consulted by the Research Directorate within the time constraints of this Response. 3. Recourse and State Protection Available to Victims Information on recourse and state protection available to LGBT persons was scarce among the sources consulted by the Research Directorate within the time constraints of this Response. US Country Reports 2016 notes that "societal stigmatization and discrimination against the LGBTI community were problems, and the government made no effort to combat it," adding that there were "no specific legal impediments to LGBTI organizations, but that none existed at year's end, due mainly to societal stigma" (US 3 Mar. 2017, 26). This Response was prepared after researching publicly accessible information currently available to the Research Directorate within time constraints. This Response is not, and does not purport to be, conclusive as to the merit of any particular claim for refugee protection. Please find below the list of sources consulted in researching this Information Request. Note [1] According to its website, Assofrage is an "independent French cultural association" established in 2010, which aims to "contribute to a better knowledge of Equatorial Guinea in France, and to cultivate the links between French and Equatorial Guineans" (Assofrage n.d.a). The website further indicates that the organization is made up of a diverse group of people that all have some attachment to Equatorial Guinea, because of having lived or worked there, having studied the country, or having friends or family there (Assofrage n.d.b). Assofrage "[a]ims to have an open and tolerant dialogue with all people of good will who know and love Equatorial Guinea and … wishes to be a privileged interlocutor for the press, politics and economic actors in France who are interested in [Equatorial Guinea]" (Assofrage n.d.b.). References The Advocate. 14 July 2014. " WATCH: Four Youth Arrested, Forced to Explain Gay Sex in Equatorial Guinea ." [Accessed 14 Mar. 2017] The Advocate. N.d. " Print Issue. " [Accessed 14 Mar. 2017] Association France-Guinée Équatoriale (Assofrage) . 10 July 2014. " Fait divers: Quatre jeunes Équato-guinéens arrêtés à Bata pour avoir commis des actes homosexuels ." [Accessed 7 Mar. 2017] Association France-Guinée Équatoriale (Assofrage) . 13 April 2014. " Fait divers: Un jeune homme arrêté pour homosexualité et exhibé à la télévision ." [Accessed 7 Mar. 2017] Association France-Guinée Équatoriale (Assofrage) . N.d.a. " Bienvenue , Bienvenido ." [Accessed 22 Mar. 2017] Association France-Guinée Équatoriale (Assofrage) . N.d.b. " Qui Sommes-Nous? " [Accessed 7 Mar. 2017] Canada. 22 February 2017. " Travel Advice and Advisories for Equatorial Guinea ." [Accessed 7 Mar. 2017] Diario Rombe . 9 July 2014. " La policía de Guinea Ecuatorial detiene a 4 jóvenes acusados de ser homosexuales ." [Accessed 8 Mar. 2017] Diario Rombe . 7 Apr. 2014. " La policía detienea un 'homosexual' y taxista y los exhiben en la TVA ." [Accessed 17 Mar. 2017] Diario Rombe . 4 June 2013. " Qué es Diario Rombe . " [Accessed 8 Mar. 2017] French Institute for International and Strategic Affairs (IRIS). November 2012. Groupe de travail sur la dépénalisation universelle de l'homosexualité . Claire Callejon. Orientation sexuelle et identité de genre à travers le monde . [Accessed 8 Mar. 2017] French Institute for International and Strategic Affairs (IRIS). N.d. "Home." [Accessed 8 Mar. 2017] Human Rights Campaign Foundation (HRC) and Human Rights First. 29 July 2014. Report: The State of Human Rights For LGBT People in Africa . [Accessed 8 Mar. 2017] Huffington Post. 31 July 2010. LePost. " Carte des droits des homosexuels dans le monde en 2010 ." [Accessed 7 Mar. 2017] International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and Intersex Association (ILGA). May 2016. Aengus Carroll. State Sponsored Homophobia . [Accessed 8 Mar. 2017] Republic of Equatorial Guinea. 1982 (amended 2012). The Fundamental Law of the Republic of Equatorial Guinea, 1982. Translated by Jefri J. Ruchti. In World Constitutions Illustrated. Edited by Jefri Jay Ruchti. Buffalo, NY: Williams S. Hein & Co., Inc. United Kingdom (UK). 30 November 2016. " Equatorial Guinea Travel Advice ." [Accessed 7 Mar. 2017] United Nations (UN). 3 February 2014. Human Rights Council. Republic of Equatorial Guinea. National Report Submitted in Accordance with Paragraph 5 of the Annex to Human Rights Council Resolution 16/21 - Equatorial Guinea . (A/HRC/WG.6/19/GNQ/1) [Accessed Mar. 2017] United States (US). 3 March 2017. Department of State. "Equatorial Guinea." Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2016 . [Accessed 8 Mar. 2017] United States (US). 14 February 2017. Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs. " Equatorial Guinea ." [Accessed 7 Mar. 2017] United States (US). 13 April 2016. Department of State. "Equatorial Guinea." Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2015 . [Accessed 8 Mar. 2017] United States (US). 25 June 2015. Department of State "Equatorial Guinea." Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2014 . [Accessed 8 Mar. 2017] Additional Sources Consulted Oral sources: Researcher, Human Rights Watch; Program Coordinator, OutRight International; Pan-African International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and Intersex Association. Internet sites, including: Amnesty International; BBC; EQUALDEX; Factiva; Freedom House; GayLawNet; GlobalGayz; The Guardian ; Human Rights Quarterly; Human Rights Watch; Journal of Refugee Studies; International Crisis Group; Jane's Intelligence Review ; OutRight International; Pink News; Reuters; SlateAfrique ; Susan's Place; UN – Refworld, Reliefweb. ​​ ​​ ​​​ Features Careers at the IRB Grow your career with us and help shape the future of Canada My Case Secure document exchange with the IRB​ IRB Accessibility Plan 2026 to 2028 Our plan to identify, remove and prevent barriers to accessibility and contribute to an accessible and barrier-free Canada Report a problem or mistake on this page This form is to be used only to report technical issues or errors encountered on our website. As submissions are anonymous , the IRB will not respond. Please select all that apply: Something is broken It has a spelling or grammar mistake The information is wrong/outdated Other/Additional details Please leave these next two fields empty. Thank you for your help! You will not receive a reply. For enquiries, contact us . Date modified: 2024-01-23 About this site About us About the Board Accessibility Careers at the IRB Members Proactive disclosure Publications Counsel conduct Country of Origin information Forms Member complaints reports Open Government portal Program and policy reviews Reports and publications Resources Acts, rules and regulations Chairperson's guidelines Decisions Legal resources Policy instruments Procedures and practice notices Statistics Stay connected Contact us News Follow us Twitter Facebook LinkedIn Youtube About this site Transparency Terms and conditions Top of Page Canada