Hate Crime - Belong To - LGBTQ+ Youth Ireland Skip to main content Quick exit Quick exit Support For Me Advice & Information LGBTQ+ Youth Hub LGBTQ+ Identities Trans Identities Coming Out How do I know if I am Trans? Self-Care and Wellbeing Relationships Bullying Physical Health Staying Safe Online Know Your Rights Mental Health Mental Health Managing Anxious Feelings Managing Low Mood Managing Sleep Difficulties Managing External Reactions Managing Self-Doubt Managing Self-Esteem Find An LGBTQ+ Youth Group Belong To’s Youth Groups Queer Joy Support Services Our Support Services Counselling Service with Pieta Drug and Alcohol Service Support For Someone Else At Home Family Support Service Ask Me Anything: Anonymous Q&A Advice for Family Members Support for Family Members LGBTQ+ Language At School Post Primary Stand Up Awareness Week LGBTQ+ Quality Mark LGBTQ+ Quality Mark Schools Map Education Resources Training for Educators Primary All Together Now In the Community Training for the Youth Sector The Rainbow Award National Network of LGBTQ+ Youth Workers In The Workplace LGBTQ+ Inclusive Workplaces Support Our Work Raise Funds Give a Gift Fundraise With Us Fundraise At Work The Rainbow Ball Belong To Boot Sale / Bring ‘n’ Buy Spill the Tea Fundraising Challenge Events Advocacy Press Releases LGBTQ+ Research Publications LGBTQ+ Campaigns Youth Advisory Panel Volunteer Give a Legacy News About Who We Are Funding and Governance Our People Our Partners Work With Us Sign Up For Our Newsletter Contact Give a Gift Search What is Hate Crime? Ireland now has a hate crime law. The Criminal Justice (Hate Offences) Act 2024 came into force in December 2024. This means that if someone commits a crime against you because of your LGBTQ+ identity, they can face a more serious punishment than they would for the same crime without that motivation. Even without this law, a crime is still a crime. You can always report something that happened to you — you don’t need to be sure it was because you’re LGBTQ+. Things you can report include: assault, verbal or physical harassment, sexual harassment, sexual violence, criminal damage to your property, stalking, someone sharing intimate images of you without your consent, death threats, and other threatening or abusive behaviour. What is a hate crime? A hate crime is a criminal act that was motivated by hate, hostility or prejudice towards the victim’s identity. A person’s identity does not need to be the only motivation for something to be considered a hate crime. Hate crimes are based on “actual or perceived” identity or characteristics. This means that you do not need to prove that you are LGBTQ+ or a member of a protected group to prove that it was a hate crime – it is up to Gardaí and lawyers to prove that the person who committed the crime knew or thought this. Under new hate crime laws, the government plans for the following identities and characteristics to be protected: sexual orientation, gender (including gender identity, gender expression, gender exploration, and being trans or intersex), disability, race, colour, nationality, ethnicity, membership of the Traveller or Roma community, religion, and age. What should I do if experience a hate crime? Make sure you are safe – go to a well-lit area with lots of other people around. In an emergency, call 999 for Gardaí. Get medical help if you need it – call 999 for an ambulance in emergencies. Contact someone you know and trust for help, or for a safe place to go to. Consider reporting the crime to Gardaí either online or in person – learn more about this below. Get support – experiencing a hate crime can be difficult and traumatic. If you need support, you can contact Belong To here , the LGBT helpline (01 685 9280), the crime victims helpline (116 006), or another support or therapy service. Can I report a hate crime? Yes – you can report a hate crime to Gardaí in person or online. You might not be sure if something happened to you because you are LGBTQ+. If you decide to report a crime to An Garda Síochána, you can explain why you think you were targeted because of your LGBTQ+ identity. How do I report hate speech or a hate crime? Hate speech is against the law in Ireland. To report hate speech, contact your local Garda station here . You can report a hate crime to An Garda Síochána at your local Garda station or online. This online report can be anonymous, or you can leave your contact details if you would like to help with the investigation. The hate crime online reporting form is available here . Know Your Rights homepage Click Here What are the Equal Status Acts? Click here Belong To – LGBTQ+ Youth Ireland is the national organisation supporting LGBTQ+ young people in Ireland. Contact us Get In Touch Join Our Community Sign Up To Our Newsletter About us Who We Are Funding and Governance Our People Our Partners Work With Us BelonG To Youth Services is a registered charity in the Republic of Ireland: RCN 20059798, CHY 16534. © BeLong To 2026 | Cookie Information | Privacy Policy Website Design & Development by FUSIO. //