Memorial investigation reveals Chechens are forcibly conscripted to fight in Ukraine Log In News Stories In Focus Opinion and Editorial Newsletters Culture Daily Brief Advertise with Us About Us Jobs Russian Invasion of Ukraine Memorial investigation reveals Chechens are forcibly conscripted to fight in Ukraine by Elizaveta Chukharova • 2 min read Share ▲ A column of volunteers from Chechnya depart Grozny for Ukraine in 2022. Photo: Grozny-inform.ru. An investigation by the Memorial Human Rights Centre has found that a mass wave of unlawful detentions has been sweeping through Chechnya, suggesting that those detained are being forcibly sent to fight in Russia’s full-scale war in Ukraine. No official information has been released on the matter. According to Memorial, this latest wave of mass detentions began after Chechen head Ramzan Kadyrov made statements urging Chechens to ‘go to war’. On 9 October, at a meeting with security officials, Kadyrov announced the formation of a new 2,500-strong regiment in the republic. He also threatened to forcibly send young residents of the republic who commit administrative offenses and lead ‘idle and immoral lifestyles’ to fight in Ukraine. On his Telegram channel later that same day, Kadyrov wrote that ‘troublemakers and violators of the order’ would be given a choice — either participate in the full-scale invasion of Ukraine or ‘go to jail for the maximum possible term’. Kadyrov also wrote that young Chechens who violate public order and disgrace their people in other regions of Russia should be collected and brought to the republic by plane for ‘re-education’. A few weeks later, Memorial recorded the first abductions and detentions. Mobilisation in Chechnya intensified further after a drone attack on a special forces university in Gudermes on 29 October. Following the attack, Kadyrov stated that there were 84,000 men of military age in Chechnya and that ‘now these 84,000 must be told, if they are men, they must go to war’, and to achieve this, ‘all these 84,000 must be reported to the military enlistment offices and called up voluntarily’. Kadyrov repeated the same figure on 12 December after another drone attack on Chechnya. According to Memorial, citing its respondents, each police unit in the republic — namely district departments and patrol service units — has been tasked with recruiting 25 to 50 ‘volunteers’ to send to the frontlines in Ukraine. Chechen law enforcement have since been carrying out mass checks of citizens at police checkpoints. At the slightest hint of any violation — including traffic violations or the lack of mandatory documents such as proof of insurance — they are detained and taken to police departments where they are subjected to psychological pressure and physical abuse, and then forced to sign a military contract. Memorial also reported that law enforcement officers infiltrate online communities and chat groups whose participants might criticise the regime in Chechnya. Those identified as ‘unreliable’ through this method are also forced to sign up as ‘volunteers’. According to the Memorial investigation, ‘recruitment’ is carried out without a preliminary medical examination, so those with serious health problems remain among the ‘candidates’. They noted that even in known cases where the Ministry of Defence refused to sign a contract due to health issues, law enforcement officers still forced relatives to pay a large sum of money to release the person’. In addition, the report found that Chechen residents are sometimes forced to recruit two new volunteers if they want to get their detained relative back. Memorial did not state in their report how many Chechens were surveyed as part of the investigation. Forced conscription for Russia’s full-scale war in Ukraine has been reported previously. For example, people have been sent to the front for drinking alcohol or using drugs , for suspected homosexuality , or for family ties to critics of Kadyrov, such as the cases of the members of the Yangulbaev family, the brother of opposition blogger Hasan Khalitov , and the nephew of politician Akhmed Zakaev . In August, Kadyrov reported during Russian President Vladimir Putin’s visit to Chechnya that the republic had sent 47,000 fighters to Ukraine since the start of Russia’s full-scale invasion in 2022, including 19,000 volunteers. Russian Invasion of Ukraine Russia North Caucasus Chechnya Human Rights Elizaveta Chukharova • Follow 803 articles • 0 Followers Liza was born and raised in Vladikavkaz and now lives in Prague. She has previously worked for RFE/RL, ASTRA, Belsat, and others. She is currently completing her PhD in German and Slavic Studies at Charles University in Prague, specialising in the study of military and inter-ethnic conflicts in the North Caucasus. In her free time, Liza shoots feature films, writes about cinema, and travels — she has visited exactly 50 countries and is not going to stop there. Related Articles North Ossetia–Alania North Ossetia lowers requirements to join civil service for Ukraine veterans by Elizaveta Chukharova • 3 min read The republic has already seen several former soldiers appointed to local government roles. North Ossetia–Alania ‘It is a post-apocalyptic sight’: North Ossetia to scrap cars abandoned by Russians fleeing mobilisation by Elizaveta Chukharova • 2 min read Around 500 abandoned cars remain in the neutral zone between Russia and Georgia. Georgia–Ukraine Relations Georgia joins pro-Ukraine UN statement as Foreign Minister speaks at Crimea Platform summit by Mikheil Gvadzabia • 3 min read Georgia’s Foreign Minister Maka Botchorishvili emphasised that they know ‘how devastating the impact of occupation can be’. Abkhazia Abkhazia discusses military registration of students with Russia amid mobilisation fears E by Elizabeth McBride • 3 min read Abkhazians with dual citizenship who reside in Russia can be registered for Russian military service. Load more Most Popular 1 . North Ossetia–Alania ‘It is a post-apocalyptic sight’: North Ossetia to scrap cars abandoned by Russians fleeing mobilisation 2 . Norway Chechen girl dies after being taken into Norway's child welfare service 3 . Azerbaijan Netanyahu set to visit Azerbaijan 4 . Podcasts Podcast | Where is the Azerbaijani opposition? 5 . Georgia Three years after Georgia’s NGO restrictions, what’s left of civil society? 6 . Georgia When Eagle Hills comes to town: what its European projects reveal about the risks for Georgia News Stories Nine-year-old girl allegedly abducted in Ingushetia in retaliation for bride kidnapping Georgian Church trades barbs with Azerbaijan government over church excavations Azerbaijani opposition leader tells Aliyev: give me a life sentence, free women political prisoners Armenian and Azerbaijan agree to ‘promote positive agenda’ amid tension Azerbaijani theologian detained after criticising hijab restrictions in schools North Ossetia lowers requirements to join civil service for Ukraine veterans Simonyan suggests some see Russia’s Gyumri base as having been a threat to Armenia Papuashvili slams EU Ambassador Herczyński’s ‘broken Georgian’ amidst Kordz concert controversy Show more Our Newsletters OC Insider Culture Dispatch Tracking the rise of authoritarianism in Georgia SUBSCRIBE Become an OC Media Member Support independent journalism in the Caucasus Join Today The Caucasus Daily Brief Friday, 25 September 2026 Members only Editor‘s Picks Georgia Three years after Georgia’s NGO restrictions, what’s left of civil society? by Lana Kokaia • 9 min read Georgia ‘Soldiers who save lives’ — Creating safe spaces amidst Georgia’s drug crackdown T by Tamuna Chkareuli • 11 min read Women’s Rights ‘A Soviet-style culture of informants’: how Georgia’s feminists learned to live under siege by Tatev Hovhannisyan • 6 min read Become an OC Media Member Support independent journalism in the Caucasus Join Today Copyright © 2026 OC-Media.org User agreement Terms of use Privacy policy About Us Who we are Our team Our writers Our policies Copyright © 2026 OC-Media.org Powered by FourthEstate Want a news site like this? Launch your own in minutes. No code. No developers.