Bhutan drops its law against sodomy Now Reading Bhutan drops its law against sodomy Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate Bhutan drops its law against sodomy by Rob Salerno March 11, 2021 Rob Salerno Read Next Cameroon: Support grows for release of trans celebrity Shakiro The tiny Himalayan nation of Bhutan became the latest country to decriminalize gay sex as its Penal Code Amendment Act came into force on Feb. 17, 2021. Stay up-to-date: Get a free subscription to Erasing 76 Crimes Bhutan is located between India and China, east of Nepal. (Map courtesy of Refugee-net.org) The process to remove the Penal Code’s Section 213 prohibiting “unnatural sex,” which was defined to include “sodomy”, began in 2019. The National Assembly, the lower house of the Bhutanese Parliament, passed a bill repealing that section, but the upper National Council reinserted it. A joint sitting of Parliament in December 2020 agreed on an amendment that maintained the prohibition on “unnatural sex” but clarified that “homosexuality between adults shall not be considered unnatural sex.” The law then awaited signature by the Druk Gyalpo, the King of Bhutan. It came into force on Feb. 17 . See Also Kazakhstan Senate approves ban on positive depictions of LGBTQ people With decriminalization in Bhutan, the total number of states that criminalize gay sex has dropped from 72 to 71 by this blog’s tally . Related Stories: Bhutan moves 1 step away from repealing anti-homosexuality law (December 2020, 76crimes.com) Bhutan prepares to repeal its anti-gay laws (June 2019, 76crimes.com) Rob Salerno March 11, 2021 The Latest Posts Turkey’s anti-LGBT crackdown expands; activists fight back Proposed Ukraine law would expand ban on anti-LGBTQ discrimination A third of LGBTQ groups say 2025’s drastic cuts will force them to close Bangladesh activists launch petition to end anti-LGBTQ discrimination Uganda’s ‘Not Free’ rating partly due to anti-LGBT laws Appeal to Indonesia to stop listing ‘LGBTQ culture’ as a national threat LGBTI+ rights activists in Turkey seek international support during crackdown Analysis: Cameroon’s anti-gay raids violated Cameroon’s own rules Ghana’s £10m deal is dead; gay fans won’t be lured to homophobic nation Turkey: 162 targeted in anti-LGBTQ+ raids Tunisia: LGBT rights activist imprisoned for shouting Previous Article Cameroon: Support grows for release of trans celebrity Shakiro Next Article View Comment (1) Leave a Reply Cancel reply Your email address will not be published. Name * E-mail * Website Notify me of new posts by email. Δ Related Posts Senegal releases 28 of 99 men arrested on gay sex charges Senegal police arrest 8 suspected lesbians 2025 LGBTQ rights update: Many bright spots in Asia amid the gloom Haiti: Gay youth stabbed by his mother is still alive Evangelical Christians block proposed protections for LGBT Haitians Despite progress, Guyana holds tight to its homophobia About The Erasing 76 Crimes news site covers the human toll of 66+ countries’ anti-gay laws and the struggle to repeal them. Member Members of the African Human Rights Media Network publish news articles and other media that educate readers about sexual minorities’ struggle for recognition of their human rights. Partner The St. Paul’s Foundation for International Reconciliation promotes LGBTQ+ rights through fact-based advocacy journalism and community projects. (California charity 80-0647355) © 2026 Erasing 76crimes. All rights reserved. Scroll To Top Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate Facebook Twitter Instagram Discover more from Erasing 76 Crimes Subscribe now to keep reading and get access to the full archive. Type your email… Subscribe Continue reading PRESS ESC TO CLOSE