Despite his claims, Trinidad leader clings to anti-LGBT laws Now Reading Despite his claims, Trinidad leader clings to anti-LGBT laws Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate Despite his claims, Trinidad leader clings to anti-LGBT laws by Colin Stewart June 23, 2016 Colin Stewart Colin Stewart is a 45-year journalism veteran living in Southern… Read Next Mob beats up 20 suspected Nigerian homosexuals The prime minister of Trinidad and Tobago claims that the government must protect its LGBT citizens, but he won’t work to repeal the Trinidadian laws that make same-sex intimacy a crime. Newsday of Trinidad and Tobago reports: PM: It does not matter who you sleep with Keith Rowley, prime minister of Trinidad and Tobago (Photo courtesy of TechNewsTT.com) The state has a duty to protect all citizens, “regardless of whom they sleep with”, Prime Minister Dr Keith Rowley said [June 17] in Parliament when questioned on whether the Government would move to protect the LGBT community. At the same time Rowley said, during Prime Minister’s Questions, that there are no plans to amend homophobic buggery laws and declined to address a question on the public call of the Equal Opportunites Commission (EOC) to protect gays from discrimination. Chaguanas West MP Ganga Singh asked, “Could the Prime Minister state the policy and/or operational measures that are in place to protect persons who are lesbian, gay, bisexual or transgender (LGBT) in Trinidad and Tobago?” Rowley replied, “I want to make it abundantly clear that every citizen of Trinidad and Tobago, regardless of who he or she may be, will have the protection of the written Constitution….All State agencies have a duty to protect every citizen of Trinidad and Tobago regardless of whom they sleep with.” The comments came days after the worst mass shooting in modern US history at a gay club at Orlando. However, when asked by Singh if there would be legal reform on the buggery law, Rowley said that did not appear in the legislative agenda tabled by Attorney General Faris Al-Rawi. On the call by EOC chairman Lynette Seebaran-Suite to include gays in the protections under the Equal Opportunity Act, Rowley declined to answer. “I would not take your word for it that she said that,” Rowley told Princes Town MP Barry Padarath. See Also Ugandan anti-LGBTQ pastor uses Charlie Kirk murder to sell books For more information, read the full article in Newsday of Trinidad and Tobago. Related articles: Caribbean nations inch their way toward LGBTI rights ( April 2016, 76crimes.com) Activists go head-to-head with unaware Trinidad boosters ( August 2015, 76crimes.com) Timeline lacking as Trinidad pushes for LGBT rights ( December 2012) Trinidad moves toward protecting gay rights (December 2012, 76crimes.com) Colin Stewart June 23, 2016 The Latest Posts Turkey’s anti-LGBT crackdown expands; activists fight back Proposed Ukraine law would expand ban on anti-LGBTQ discrimination A third of LGBTQ groups say 2025’s drastic cuts will force them to close Bangladesh activists launch petition to end anti-LGBTQ discrimination Uganda’s ‘Not Free’ rating partly due to anti-LGBT laws Appeal to Indonesia to stop listing ‘LGBTQ culture’ as a national threat LGBTI+ rights activists in Turkey seek international support during crackdown Analysis: Cameroon’s anti-gay raids violated Cameroon’s own rules Ghana’s £10m deal is dead; gay fans won’t be lured to homophobic nation Turkey: 162 targeted in anti-LGBTQ+ raids Sodom, Gomorrah and 2 faiths’ fear of same-sex love Previous Article Mob beats up 20 suspected Nigerian homosexuals Next Article View Comments (3) Michele Moss Jones says: June 23, 2016 at 2:49 pm As someone who was raised inTrinidad by a Trinidadian mother I will always claim that side of my heritage. Yet I will also continue to denounce the hypocrisy of its backward laws. People asked me if I will move back to Trinidad. My answer is when Trinidad moves forward in time and I can be myself. Reply m0db0w says: August 17, 2020 at 7:53 pm You did everyone in tnt a favour. Stay where yuh is. Stay safe. Reply Leave a Reply Cancel reply Your email address will not be published. Name * E-mail * Website Notify me of new posts by email. Δ Related Posts LGBTQ rights update: 2025 tally and 2026 preview 2025 LGBTQ rights update: Progress and backsliding in Latin America and Caribbean Niue: Tally of nations with anti-homosexuality laws drops to 65 Challenge to Trinidad anti-gay law heads toward climactic ruling How Trinidad lost the right to gay sex Tally of nations with anti-gay laws edges back up to 66 About The Erasing 76 Crimes news site covers the human toll of 66+ countries’ anti-gay laws and the struggle to repeal them. Member Members of the African Human Rights Media Network publish news articles and other media that educate readers about sexual minorities’ struggle for recognition of their human rights. Partner The St. Paul’s Foundation for International Reconciliation promotes LGBTQ+ rights through fact-based advocacy journalism and community projects. (California charity 80-0647355) © 2026 Erasing 76crimes. All rights reserved. Scroll To Top Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate Facebook Twitter Instagram Discover more from Erasing 76 Crimes Subscribe now to keep reading and get access to the full archive. Type your email… Subscribe Continue reading PRESS ESC TO CLOSE