LGBTQ rights in São Tomé and Príncipe — Wikipedia Republished // WIKI 2 To install click the Add extension button. That's it. The source code for the WIKI 2 extension is being checked by specialists of the Mozilla Foundation, Google, and Apple. You could also do it yourself at any point in time. How to transfigure the Wikipedia Would you like Wikipedia to always look as professional and up-to-date? We have created a browser extension. It will enhance any encyclopedic page you visit with the magic of the WIKI 2 technology. Try it — you can delete it anytime. Install in 5 seconds Yep, but later 4,5 Kelly Slayton Congratulations on this excellent venture… what a great idea! Alexander Grigorievskiy I use WIKI 2 every day and almost forgot how the original Wikipedia looks like. Live Statistics English Articles Improved in 24 Hours Added in 24 Hours Languages Recent العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Español Français Italiano עברית Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Tiếng Việt Show all languages What we do. Every page goes through several hundred of perfecting techniques; in live mode. Quite the same Wikipedia. Just better. Great Wikipedia has got greater. . Leo Newton Brights Milds Show original Random article LGBTQ rights in São Tomé and Príncipe From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia LGBTQ rights in São Tomé and Príncipe São Tomé and Príncipe Status Legal since 2012 Gender identity No Military No Discrimination protections Yes (sexual orientation only) Family rights Recognition of relationships No Adoption No Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer (LGBTQ) people in São Tomé and Príncipe face legal challenges not experienced by non- LGBTQ residents. Both male and female forms of same-sex sexual activity are legal in São Tomé and Príncipe , however LGBTQ persons face stigmatization among the broader population. São Tomé and Príncipe was one of the few African states that signed a " joint statement on ending acts of violence and related human rights violations based on sexual orientation and gender identity " at the United Nations , condemning violence and discrimination against LGBTQ people. Laws regarding same-sex sexual activity Under the Penal Code of São Tomé and Príncipe that took effect in November 2012, same-sex sexual activity is legal. The age of consent is 16 years regardless of sexual orientation or gender. [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Recognition of same-sex relationships São Tomé and Príncipe does not recognize same-sex marriages , civil unions , or domestic partnerships . [ 3 ] Discrimination protections The Labour Code 2019 Article 16.2 bans workplace discrimination based on sex and sexual orientation, among other grounds. No worker or job candidate can be privileged, benefited, harmed, deprived of any right or exempt from any duty in reason, namely, of ancestry and social origin, race, color, age, sex, sexual orientation, marital status, family situation, genetic heritage, ability to reduced work, disability, chronic illness, nationality, ethnic origin, religion, political beliefs or ideological and union affiliation. [ 4 ] Under Article 130(2)(d) of the Penal Code, crimes motivated by hatred of the victim's sexual orientation are eligible for enhanced sentencing. [ 3 ] Public opinion A 2016 poll found that 46% of Sāo Toméans would like or not mind having an LGBTQ neighbor. [ 5 ] Summary table Same-sex sexual activity legal (Since 2012) Equal age of consent (Since 2012) Anti-discrimination laws in employment only (Since 2019; sexual orientation only) Anti-discrimination laws in the provision of goods and services Anti-discrimination laws in all other areas (Incl. indirect discrimination, hate speech) Same-sex marriages Recognition of same-sex couples Step-child adoption by same-sex couples Joint adoption by same-sex couples Gays and lesbians allowed to serve openly in the military Right to change legal gender Access to IVF for lesbians Commercial surrogacy for gay male couples MSMs allowed to donate blood See also LGBTQ portal São Tomé and Príncipe portal Human rights in São Tomé and Príncipe LGBTQ rights in Africa References ^ "Código Penal: Aprovado pela Lei 6/2012" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 20 May 2013 . ^ "Novo Código Penal já entrou em vigor" . www.telanon.info . 8 November 2012 . Retrieved 1 March 2021 . ^ a b Mendos, Lucas Ramon (1 December 2020). "State-Sponsored Homophobia" (PDF) . ^ "NATLEX - Sao Tome and Principe - Ley núm. 6/2019, de 16 de noviembre de 2018, que aprueba el Código del Trabajo" . natlex.ilo.org . Retrieved 3 January 2025 . ^ "What are the best and worst countries to be gay in Africa?" . Gay Star News . 1 March 2016. Archived from the original on 7 December 2018 . Retrieved 3 July 2019 . v t e LGBTQ rights in Africa Sovereign states Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe States with limited recognition Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic Somaliland Dependencies and other territories Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla (Spain) Madeira (Portugal) Mayotte / Réunion (France) Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom) Western Sahara v t e São Tomé and Príncipe articles History Colonial era governors Batepá massacre MLSTP Attempted coups 1988 1995 2003 2022 COVID-19 pandemic Geography Cities and towns Districts Gulf of Guinea Islands Forests Príncipe Parque Natural Obô do Príncipe Rivers São Tomé Island Parque Natural Obô de São Tomé Pico de São Tomé (mountain) São Tomé (city) Wildlife birds mammals Politics Elections Foreign relations Human rights LGBT Military Chief of Staff Law Ministers National Assembly Political parties Presidents Prime Ministers Economy Banks Central Bank Cocoa Companies Dobra (currency) Telecommunications Transport Society Anthem Coat of arms Culture Demographics Languages Beti-Pahuin peoples Literature Flag Music Public holidays Religion Sport Outline Index Category Portal This page was last edited on 17 February 2025, at 18:33 Basis of this page is in Wikipedia . Text is available under the CC BY-SA 3.0 Unported License . Non-text media are available under their specified licenses. Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. WIKI 2 is an independent company and has no affiliation with Wikimedia Foundation. Contact WIKI 2 Introduction Terms of Service Privacy Policy Wikipedia Makes No Guarantee of Validity