Relief among Samoan fa'afafine at removal of impersonation crime | RNZ Skip to main content News Life News Life Radio Podcasts Video Sections Search all of RNZ Rapua News Pitopito kōrero Show Hide Politics World Business Personal finance Sport Crime / Justice Health Education Environment Science / Tech Emergencies Community Regions Country Weather Te Ao Māori Pacific IndoNZ 中文 News Pitopito kōrero Show Hide Politics World Business Personal finance Sport Crime / Justice Health Education Environment Science / Tech Emergencies Community Regions Country Weather Te Ao Māori Pacific IndoNZ 中文 Life Tauoranga Show Hide Browse all Screens Books Culture Music Food Wellbeing Lifestyle Relationships People Life Tauoranga Show Hide Browse all Screens Books Culture Music Food Wellbeing Lifestyle Relationships People Radio Irirangi Show Hide RNZ National RNZ Concert RNZ Pacific Parliament More ways to listen Radio Irirangi Show Hide RNZ National RNZ Concert RNZ Pacific Parliament More ways to listen Podcasts Kōnae ipurangi Video Ataata Storytime Puna tamariki News sections Show Hide Politics World Business Personal finance Sport Crime / Justice Health Education Environment Science / Tech Emergencies Community Regions Country Weather Te Ao Māori Pacific IndoNZ 中文 News sections Show Hide Politics World Business Personal finance Sport Crime / Justice Health Education Environment Science / Tech Emergencies Community Regions Country Weather Te Ao Māori Pacific IndoNZ 中文 Follow the news Show Hide Sign up for our Daily Newsletter Subscribe to RNZ News with RSS Get the RNZ App Facebook Instagram YouTube TikTok Follow the news Show Hide Sign up for our Daily Newsletter Subscribe to RNZ News with RSS Get the RNZ App Facebook Instagram YouTube TikTok Listen to the news Show Hide RNZ National RNZ Pacific Parliament More ways to listen Listen to the news Show Hide RNZ National RNZ Pacific Parliament More ways to listen World Politics Crime / Justice Business Sport Health Education Environment Community Country Weather Te Ao Māori Pacific IndoNZ 中文 RNZ / News / Pacific Link: https://www.rnz.co.nz/news/eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiJ9._g.pKhUMkRnoOZwX4iq2fhLAqba5Rz0jb3mINKRqASmxf0/pacific/211958%2Frelief-among-samoan-fa'afafine-at-removal-of-impersonation-crime News Pacific 3 May 2013, 12:01pm Relief among Samoan fa'afafine at removal of impersonation crime The president of the Samoa Fa'afafine Association says fa'afafine are relieved that it is no longer illegal to impersonate a woman. Fa'afafine describes a cultural tradition in Samoa in which males are brought up and live their lives as females. Under the new Crimes Act which came into force last week the crime of impersonating a woman has been scrapped. To'oto'oali'i Roger Stanley told Annell Husband that's brought huge relief, despite the fact that that section of the Crimes Ordinance 1961 had not been enforced for decades. STANLEY: You never know, but it could have been enforced, who knows? It might be down the line someone else, from our future leaders and our politicians, someone else could always fix it up and say to enforce that. So I'm so glad it's not been removed. HUSBAND: So is the fa'afafine community anticipating that this change will lead to other liberalisation of laws? STANLEY: One of the things that we have, but it's not been successful is the one with sodomy. HUSBAND: So what's the law around that at the moment? STANLEY: That still remains. And I think we're happy with it, because the sodomy, it's basically penetrating of, you know... It affects women, as well. They get raped and they get penetrated by the anus, which is the true definition of sodomy, I think that one still remains. HUSBAND: OK. So that is not something that the fa'afafine community is going to be agitating about? STANLEY: Yes, yes. You're right. HUSBAND: You're happy with that, the way it stands, as being illegal? As you say, this was not really something that was enforced, so it wasn't a huge concern, but it is good to know that it's not illegal anymore. Is there any sort of celebration taking place or anything like that? STANLEY: (LAUGHS) Yeah, but I think because I mentioned that in my own Facebook page, I was calling out for everyone to celebrate. But, no, we're not doing a major celebration at the moment in the country, but we are having an event coming up at the end of the month, it's called a Fa'afafine Forum, talking about our health issues. It's an initiative of the Ministry of Health. So we're going to talk on everything on everything about our spirit, mind and body and also our normal charity events, which are Miss Drag Queen, Miss Fa'afafine on the 1st of June this year, doing our independent celebrations. And also I would just like to say to all the gay activists out there that although we are pushing for our own issues here in our own country, that doesn't mean we're against gay marriage and all that. We are our their friends, we are their families, they are our friends and our families. We do support them all the way. But it is not our priority at this moment. News Pacific 3 May 2013, 12:01pm Print More Pacific View all Pacific articles Vanuatu signs declaration to give children and youth greater voice on climate Fijiana finish WXV Global Series Challenger unbeaten Oceania Rugby says no money to host Oceania Sevens Cup in Rotorua 'They just have to get out': Civilians pay the price for West Papua conflict Ngā Pitopito Kōrero RNZ's daily newsletter Sign up for Ngā Pitopito Kōrero , a daily newsletter curated by our editors and delivered straight to your inbox. More News View RNZ homepage Ministry delays rules on too-hot homes Germany’s AfD is so extreme it’s putting off other far-right parties Explainer: Can you get arrested for vandalising a campaign sign? 'She's a miracle': the Northland nana who got off meth Ngā Pitopito Kōrero RNZ's daily newsletter Sign up for Ngā Pitopito Kōrero , a daily newsletter curated by our editors and delivered straight to your inbox. © RNZ, original at https://www.rnz.co.nz/news/eyJhbGciOiJIUzI1NiJ9._g.pKhUMkRnoOZwX4iq2fhLAqba5Rz0jb3mINKRqASmxf0/pacific/211958%2Frelief-among-samoan-fa'afafine-at-removal-of-impersonation-crime Footer navigation RNZ Stations National Concert RNZ Pacific Parliament - live stream On demand Latest on demand radio Latest podcasts Latest video How to watch & listen Audio help Radio Follow our podcasts Sky, Freeview & Satellite YouTube RNZ apps for iPhone and Android RNZ Flash Briefing for Amazon Alexa RNZ News for Google Assistant About RNZ About Contact Audience Feedback and Complaints Media Releases Awards Jobs Join RNZ Research Panel Local Democracy Reporting RNZ Commissioning RNZ Emergency Join & Follow RNZ Facebook Twitter YouTube Instagram Sign up to RNZ Newsletters Terms of use © Copyright Radio New Zealand 2026 You have JavaScript disabled. Without it you will not be able to play audio or video, please enable JavaScript in your browser. Close banner