First same-sex marriage conversion on Isle of Man 'huge milestone' - BBC News BBC Homepage Skip to content Accessibility Help Your account Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live More menu More menu Search BBC Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Close menu BBC News Menu Home Climate World UK Business Tech Science Entertainment & Arts Health In Pictures More BBC Verify Newsbeat Europe Isle of Man/Ellan Vannin First same-sex marriage conversion on Isle of Man 'huge milestone' Published 28 July 2016 Share close panel Share page Copy link About sharing Image source, Marc Steffan-Cowell Image caption, Marc and Alan Steffan-Cowell said it had been a straight forward process The first same-sex couple to change their civil partnership into a marriage on the Isle on Man have said it is a "huge milestone". Marc and Alan Steffan-Cowell, both 26, became the first couple to convert their civil partnership on Monday. They did not want another ceremony over fears it would make their wedding day on 3 July 2015 "less special". The couple said they feel "happy and proud". Same-sex marriages were made legal on the island on Friday. 'Piece of history' They became legal after Royal Assent to the Marriage and Civil Partnership Act was granted. Under the legislation the couple, who met in 2014, have been able to keep the same date for their wedding day as they elected not to have a second ceremony. Image source, Marc Steffan-Cowell Image caption, Marc and Alan Steffan-Cowell entered into a civil partnership in 2015 having met a year earlier They signed new forms before being issued with a wedding certificate. Marc, from Kent, who is due to start training as a student constable, said: "To be able to stand alongside everyone else and have our marriage be equally as important certainty matters a great deal, not just to us but the LGBT community as a whole. "The support from family, friends and well-wishers across the whole of the Isle of Man has been truly remarkable. "To have a small piece of history in being the first same-sex couple to be married is amazing and we feel very privileged and honoured to have done so." The Marriage and Civil Partnership Act is based on the same legal framework introduced in England two years ago. The change in the Isle of Man law has been hailed as " historic moment " by the island's chief minister. More on this story Same-sex Manx marriages can go ahead Published 19 July 2016 Related internet links The Manx Rainbow Association Isle of Man Government The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. From other local news sites Eating disorder support group to host first meeting External 3FM Isle of Man Online historic newspapers halted next month External 3FM Isle of Man Quaterbridge Road closed for tree works External Manx Radio Douglas Council to hold annual Civic Service External Manx Radio 'We had never talked about it': How one mum turned her son's final gift into a campaign for organ donation External Isle of Man Newspapers Man accused of making nuisance calls to emergency services refused bail External Isle of Man Newspapers Information about BBC links to other news sites The video playlist Watch our pick of standout clips from across the BBC Previous Next 1:31 The ups and downs of SpaceX's Starship test flights. 00:01:31, play video The ups and downs of SpaceX's Starship test flights 1:18 At the scene of counter-terrorism operation near RAF Fairford. 00:01:18, play video At the scene of counter-terrorism operation near RAF Fairford 0:39 Hundreds block Orange Order march in Northern Ireland. 00:00:39, play video Hundreds block Orange Order march in Northern Ireland 0:56 PM proposes NHS style social care system for England. 00:00:56, play video PM proposes NHS style social care system for England 1:13 Buckingham Palace hosts dance lessons. 00:01:13, play video Buckingham Palace hosts dance lessons 1:03 Is Labour's housing scheme a new idea, or an old Tory one? 00:01:03, play video Is Labour's housing scheme a new idea, or an old Tory one? 0:55 How to win an aura battle. 00:00:55, play video How to win an aura battle 1:35 The peculiar way Poirot got his walk. 00:01:35, play video The peculiar way Poirot got his walk 1:27 Could Manchester City lose some of its trophies? 00:01:27, play video Could Manchester City lose some of its trophies? 1:30 Using AI to detect fake goods online. 00:01:30, play video Using AI to detect fake goods online 0:47 'They've behaved so badly' says Man City fan. 00:00:47, play video 'They've behaved so badly' says Man City fan 1:10 Is it OK to take an iced coffee to a job interview? 00:01:10, play video Is it OK to take an iced coffee to a job interview? 1:09 What are the charges against Man City? 00:01:09, play video What are the charges against Man City? 0:35 Rory Stewart on his viral Newsnight moment. 00:00:35, play video Rory Stewart on his viral Newsnight moment 1:08 Why is the Pope in France? 00:01:08, play video Why is the Pope in France? 0:47 Should we ban the word 'awesome'? 00:00:47, play video Should we ban the word 'awesome'? 1:37 Question Time panel clash over welfare policy. 00:01:37, play video Question Time panel clash over welfare policy Top stories Five arrested as counter-terror police investigate major incident near RAF Fairford Published 1 hour ago What we know about RAF Fairford counter-terror probe Published 1 hour ago Burnham proposes NHS-style social care system for England Published 7 hours ago More to explore Celebrity Traitors 2 cast: Who are this year's 'big dogs' and dark horses? I was born while my mother was in an iron lung Killer Christa Pike to be executed within days - but her defence say she's a victim too Child's hidden letter found after 44 years I was angry at my husband - I didn't know he had dementia School holiday fines climb despite growing backlash 'Our wedding present left us gutted': Couple join dozens in car seller dispute US Politics Unspun: Cut through the noise with Anthony Zurcher's newsletter Could an iced coffee freeze you out of the job market? Elsewhere on the BBC Anne Hathaway and Jessica Chastain star in a psychological thriller How many dead people are on the internet? The hit podcast explores Thomas More's iconic text 'Utopia' Was Colin Norris wrongly convicted of killing his patients? Most read 1 Five arrested as counter-terror police investigate major incident near RAF Fairford 2 What we know about RAF Fairford counter-terror probe 3 Burnham proposes NHS-style social care system for England 4 No handshakes between Republic of Ireland and Israel 5 Ten NHS staff removed over Noah Woods data breach 6 Orange Order march row goes to heart of ongoing divisions in Northern Ireland 7 Two mass shootings in South Africa leave 27 dead 8 Killer Christa Pike to be executed within days - but her defence say she's a victim too 9 Celebrity Traitors 2 cast: Who are this year's 'big dogs' and dark horses? 10 Traitors star burgled after sharing holiday photos BBC News Services On your mobile On smart speakers Get news alerts Contact BBC News Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Accessibility Help Parental Guidance Contact the BBC Careers BBC emails for you Advertise with us Copyright © 2026 BBC. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.