CREEPING
CRIMINALISATION
Mapping of Indonesia’s National Laws and Regional Regulations
That Violate Human Rights of Women and LGBTIQ People
Written By Nursyahbani Katjasungkana and Saskia E. Wieringa
Edited By Grace Poore

Every day around the world, LGBTIQ people’s human rights and dignity are abused in ways
that shock the conscience. The stories of their struggles and their resilience are astounding,
yet remain unknown—or willfully ignored—by those with the power to make change. OutRight
Action International, founded in 1990 as the International Gay and Lesbian Human Rights
Commission, works alongside LGBTIQ people in the Global South, with offices in six countries,
to help identify community-focused solutions to promote policy for lasting change. We
vigilantly monitor and document human rights abuses to spur action when they occur. We
train partners to expose abuses and advocate for themselves. Headquartered in New York
City, OutRight is the only global LGBTIQ-specific organization with a permanent presence at
the United Nations in New York that advocates for human rights progress for LGBTIQ people.

hello@OutRightInternational.org
https://www.facebook.com/outrightintl
http://twitter.com/outrightintl
http://www.youtube.com/lgbthumanrights
http://OutRightInternational.org/indonesia-legal-mapping-report

OutRight Action International
80 Maiden Lane, Suite 1505, New York, NY 10038 U.S.A.
P: +1 (212) 430.6054 • F: +1 (212) 430.6060

This work may be reproduced and redistributed, in whole or in part, without alteration and without prior written permission, solely for
nonprofit administrative or educational purposes provided all copies contain the following statement:
© 2016 OutRight Action International. This work is reproduced and distributed with the permission of OutRight Action International. No
other use is permitted without the express prior written permission of OutRight Action International.
For permission, contact hello@OutRightInternational.org.

CREEPING
CRIMINALISATION
Mapping of Indonesia’s National Laws and Regional Regulations
That Violate Human Rights of Women and LGBTIQ People

Written By Nursyahbani Katjasungkana and Saskia E. Wieringa
Edited By Grace Poore

Table of Contents
Acknowledgements

01

Executive Summary

02

Glossary & Accronyms

07

Introduction

10

Methodology

12

Country Context

14

Human Rights Overview
Human Rights and Indonesia
Human Rights and Islam
Gender Diversity In Indonesia And Post Colonial Amnesia

17
17
18
20

International Laws

24

National Laws

27

Regional Laws
Overview
Outline of Regional Regulations
Aceh Special Region (Daerah Istimewa Aceh)
East Kalimantan
DKI Jakarta
Lampung
North Sumatera
South Sulawesi
South Sumatera
Yogyakarta/Jogjakarta

38
38
41
42
45
47
48
52
59
61
65

Case Studies
Historic Waria Institution Shut Down
Therapy to Force LGBTIQ Conversion
Activist And Family Targeted For Homophobic Attacks

67
67
69
70

Postcript: Impact of Future Developments

71

Recommendations

73

References

75

Annexes
Annex I
Annex II

79
79
84

1

Acknowledgements

This report was researched and authored by Nursyahbani Katjasungkana,
a human rights lawyer in Indonesia and Saskia E. Wieringa, anthropologist
and sexual rights specialist. The report was edited by Grace Poore,
OutRight’s Program Coordinator for Asia and Pacific Islands. Invaluable
editorial assistance was provided by Rashima Kwatra, Karen Kraan,
Roberta Sklar and Yasmin Tambiah. The following provided data collection
assistance: Arus Pelangi (national LGBT rights advocacy organization in
Indonesia), Komnas Perempuan (Indonesian Commission on Violence
Against Women), Ardhanary Institute (feminist LBT organization in
Indonesia), and Our Voice (LGBT organization in Indonesia). The Bahasa
Indonesia translation of the report was done by Alfa Lubis and edited by
Michelle Dian Lestari. Fitri Hendriyani, OutRight’s Grant Administrator and
Project Officer provided administrative support. The report is designed by
DesignLab.

2

C r e e p i n g

Executive

C r i m i n a l i s a t i o n

Summary

E x e c u t i v e
S u m m a r y

Creeping Criminalisation: Mapping of Indonesia’s National
Laws And Regional Regulations That Violate Human Rights
of Women and LGBTIQ People is a report by OutRight Action
International.

It maps the legal framework in which lesbian,

specificities of the impact of these national

gay, bisexual, transgender, intersex and

laws and regional regulations on LGBTIQ

queer (LGBTIQ) rights and women’s rights in

rights and women’s rights.

Indonesia are curtailed. Except when quoting
or referencing a source, OutRight uses

The purpose of this report is to be an

“LGBTIQ” to cover a broader spectrum of non

advocacy tool for Indonesian activists and

heteronormative sexualities and genders. We

allies for human rights, women’s rights

acknowledge that some terms in Indonesia’s

and LGBTIQ rights. It is laid out to give

national language as well as in languages used

specific legal information and analysis

by different communities at the regional level

regarding national and regional level laws

may be more nuanced in conveying fluidity of

and regulations. It provides general historic

gender and sexual orientation.

background of Indonesia’s legal processes as
context for understanding the proliferation

In this report we examine national laws

of regional regulations. Information on

and laws in eight provinces, called regional

international human rights law is also

regulations that are passed by provincial

provided since Indonesia has ratified several

legislatures or local governments in order

international human rights treaties.

to understand the commonalities and

3

important to note that debates on gender

draft conservative regional regulations. For

and sexuality issues, including on LGBTIQ

example, Muslim dress codes are imposed

issues have increased in Indonesia. Over

at regional levels, while they are not at the

the last decade the LGBTIQ movement

national level. Meanwhile, to date, there

has become more visible, exposing the

is no national anti-discrimination law that

stigma, discrimination and violence that

comprehensively covers internationally

LGBTIQ people experience. At the same

recognized grounds of discrimination,

time, conservative actors in Indonesia have

including sexual orientation and gender

also become more vocal. Several hard-line

identity (SOGI). There is also no SOGI-

Muslim militias have gained notoriety for

specific law or a law that specifically protects

interfering with LGBTIQ gatherings and for

women from gender based discrimination.

LGBTIQ individuals. Prominent political and
religious leaders have also made homophobic
statements. The Ministry of Women’s

Overview of Findings
For this report, we analysed regional

sexual rights in the late 1990s, has become

regulations that discriminate on the basis

increasingly conservative.

of gender and sexual orientation in eight

The purpose of this report
is to be an advocacy tool for
Indonesian activists and allies
for human rights, women’s
rights and LGBTIQ rights.

provinces: Aceh, DKI Jakarta, East Kalimantan,
Lampung, North Sumatera, South Sulawesi,
South Sumatera and Yogyakarta. The analysis
demonstrates that though there is much
overlap among the provinces, there are also
significant regional variations.

Creeping Criminalisation highlights that the
Annual reports of the National Commission

regional regulations (at province, district

on Violence Against Women (Komnas

and city levels) examined for this report do

Perempuan) indicate that violence

not fall in line with national laws, contravene

against women including lesbian,

the Indonesian Constitution, and ignore

bisexual and transgender (LBT) women

the Pancasila—the five pillars that are the

is rampant and, regional regulations

foundational principles of Indonesia. It is

in the provinces are having adverse

observed that when reference is made to the

impact on gender based violence.

Pancasila as justification for the construction
of conservative laws, only the first sila (Belief

For the purpose of understanding Indonesia’s

In One God) is quoted and a narrow, more

legislative processes, it is important to

extremist, interpretation of Islamic law is

distinguish that the Central government

pushed onto all Indonesians, regardless of

of Indonesia granted regional autonomy

the religious, ethnic, and cultural diversity

to principal governments of provinces as

of Indonesian society and in contrast to the

part of the Reformation Era, which began

moderate interpretation of Islam practiced by

in 1998. As a result, lawmakers at the

most Indonesians.

S u m m a r y

Empowerment, after a progressive start on

E x e c u t i v e

committing other acts of violence against

C r i m i n a l i s a t i o n

provincial level seized the opportunity to
C r e e p i n g

In setting the context for the report, it is

4

C r e e p i n g
C r i m i n a l i s a t i o n

The first key finding of the legal

which ‘tradition’ or ‘culture’ since Indonesia

mapping is that the growing influence of

has many different cultural traditions, which

fundamentalist interpretations of Islam

religion and religious interpretation is being

affects the understanding of the relationship

followed, what particular religious texts are

between the Indonesian State and religion.

being used, and what exactly the religious

Human rights are increasingly seen as a

teachings say about what is being claimed in

Western concept, although the Pancasila

the regional regulations. Human rights-based

contains pillars that stress human rights.

interpretations of Islam are not favoured.

Homosexuality is seen as a disease to
be cured by religious counselling and
rehabilitation, and also as a crime to be
punished. Women’s subordination to men

E x e c u t i v e

and the prohibition of homosexuality are

Most of the regional lawmakers
do not have the technical skills
to draft laws and regulations.

central tenets, affecting formulation of the
regional regulations.

Regional legislators are often motivated
by local politics and play to the religious

S u m m a r y

A second key finding is that violence and

sentiments of voters to maintain their power

discrimination against women (including LBT

and position. In this discourse of tradition

women and also gay and transgender men)

and morality, various regional regulations are

are not considered crimes. A number of the

not based on the rule of law but on vague and

discriminatory regional regulations contain

undefined or ill-defined notions of culture,

specific references to the responsibility of

respectability, or national identity. There is

‘the society’ to report conceived violations.

often a conflation of indecency, sex work,

This mobilisation of homophobic and

pedophilia and homosexuality.

misogynist sentiments has led to the
establishment of a ‘moral police’ (such as in
Aceh). The appeals of the morality police to
members of the community to take the law
into their own hands potentially contribute
to mob violence.

Escalation of
Anti-LGBT Sentiments
While research for this report was
underway, several disturbing developments

A third key finding is that most of the

took place which impact the rights of

regional lawmakers do not have the technical

Indonesian LGBTIQ citizens: the country

skills to draft laws and regulations. They

became engulfed in a vitriolic media

do not understand national versus district

campaign in which LGBTIQ groups and

level jurisdiction. Many of them do not

individuals were vilified and several national

grasp the concept of gender equality; they

political parties are currently discussing

do not understand key principles of the

anti-LGBT legislation in Parliament.

Constitution. Most regional regulations

See Annexes I and II to this report.

explicitly state that their goal is to free the
region from immoral acts and to assert

During the national furore against LGBTIQ

norms of decency based on religion and

groups in the first months of 2016, conversion

culture. However, they seldom spell out

therapy was widely advocated for the

5

they want Indonesia to have clearer norms

scientific evidence that such therapy does

and regulations ‘stipulating that anyone

not work and has been proved to be a harmful

having casual sex is committing adultery’.

practice with long-term consequences.

They asked the court to change the terms

1

‘adults’ and ‘minors’ in Article 292 to ‘people’,

Parawansa in fact promoted the Emotional,

which would criminalise adult consensual

Spiritual Quotient (ESQ) method so LGBTIQ

same sex relations. The petitioners also

people could become ‘normal’ again. The

want to annul Article 284 on adultery and

push for conversion therapy continues to

Article 285 on rape in an attempt to make

the present time.

any sexual relations between unmarried

2

persons a crime.6 If the Constitutional Court
agrees, many of the discriminatory regional

2016, a national anti-LGBT law was proposed

regulations discussed in this report would

for Indonesia by parliamentarians from

suddenly all be in line with the Criminal Code.

conservative parties. If such a law passes,
3

Indonesia will join other countries in the
criminalise same sex relations. In the midst
of the homophobic campaign a survey was

Recommendations
Include:

conducted which indicated that LGBT people

At the district level:

were the most disliked group in Indonesia,

•

even more so than communists.

Increase the capacity and technical skill
sets of legislators to draft comprehensive

4

laws, which uphold human rights,
A petition was also filed by Aliansi Cinta

women’s rights and LGBTIQ rights.

Keluarga (Family Love Alliance) with the

In each district, the relevant regional

Constitutional Court for judicial review

bylaws/regulations need to be analysed,

of several articles of the Criminal Code,

using a women’s rights, LGBTIQ rights

which, if accepted by the court, would make

and human rights framework. The bylaws

consensual same-sex behaviour and any

need to be adapted to national and

sexual activities outside of legal marriages

international laws and standards.

punishable. Not only LGBTIQ people, but
5

all Indonesians will be affected as both

At the national level:

rights to privacy and non-discrimination

•

The government of Indonesia must

will be threatened. At the time of finalizing

ensure that the national Constitution,

this report it is not yet clear how the

laws and policies do not discriminate, are

Court will rule. The petitioners argued

in line with the country’s international

that homosexuality is ‘contagious’ and

obligations, and are consistent with

1 http://www.abualbanicentre.com/rehabilitasi-kelainan-orientasi-sexual
2 https://m.tempo.co.read/new/2016/02/28/173749009/menteri-khofifah-lgbt-bisa-sembuh
3 http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2016/04/15/ppp-to-propose-anti-lgbt-propaganda-bill-1460698417.html and http://www.thejakartapost.com/
news/2016/03/05/hanura-calls-law-against-lgbt-people.html and http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2016/08/03/gay-sex-may-be-outlawed.html
4 http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2016/08/01/lgbt-community-most-disliked-by-indonesian-muslims-survey.html
5 http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2016/08/03/gay-sex-may-be-outlawed.html
6 http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2016/08/03/gay-sex-may-be-outlawed.html

S u m m a r y

region who have British colonial laws that

E x e c u t i v e

In March and April, and again in August

C r i m i n a l i s a t i o n

The Minister of Social Affairs, Khofifah Indar

C r e e p i n g

‘rehabilitation’ of homosexual people despite

6

C r e e p i n g
C r i m i n a l i s a t i o n

•

each other. Discriminatory provisions

At the international level:

of national laws (for example the Anti-

•

Indonesia has ratified at least six UN

Pornography Law), which infringe on

human rights treaties. It must accept

basic rights enshrined in the Constitution,

the Concluding Observations of treaty

must be amended or removed. Lawmakers

bodies and take measures to implement

should not draft legislation that

Recommendations, including any relating

breach existing rights enshrined in the

to gender and sexual orientation, i.e.,

Constitution.

LGBTIQ issues.

The government of Indonesia must

•

Indonesia must implement the

E x e c u t i v e

exercise its power to revoke regional

Conclusions and Recommendations of

bylaws/regulations that infringe upon

the Report of the UN High Commissioner

the human rights of Indonesian citizens,

for Human Rights on discriminatory

including LGBTIQ people, as enshrined in

laws and practices against groups and

the Constitution and national laws. Such

individuals on grounds of gender and

a revocation would be in line with the

sexual orientation.

S u m m a r y

national Law on Regional Autonomy and
the mandate on the hierarchy of laws.

•

LGBTIQ groups must seize the
opportunity to make presentations on

•

The government of Indonesia must adopt

the conditions of Indonesian LGBTIQ

necessary measures to prevent, reduce

people to the newly created position

and eliminate the conditions and attitudes

of UN Independent Expert on Sexual

that cause or perpetuate discrimination

Orientation and Gender Identity.

against women and LGBTIQ communities.
This includes applying the principles

•

•

LGBTIQ groups must actively participate

of equality and non discrimination in

in UN processes (Universal Periodic

the international human rights treaties

Review, treaty body reviews) to highlight

that Indonesia is party to—including

concerns impacting LGBTIQ communities.

the Convention on the Elimination of All

Other human rights groups, including

Forms of Discrimination Against Women

women’s rights and child rights groups

(CEDAW), International Covenant on Civil

must amplify the voices of LGBTIQ groups

and Political Rights (ICCPR), International

in these international spaces—their

Convention on Rights of the Child (CRC).

recommendations to the UN must be

This also includes implementing the

comprehensive to improve conditions for

Yogyakarta Principles to combat LGBTIQ

all marginalized communities, including

discrimination.

LGBTIQ.

Civil society groups must initiate debates
on human rights, LGBTIQ rights and
women’s rights in relation to cultural and
religious diversity.

7

Amah

particular form of Islamic worship

AMM

Aceh Monitoring Mission

AMN

Aceh Monitoring Network

Aqidah

fiqih-based regulations, related to practices assumed to belong to the Prophet

Arus Pelangi

literally, Rainbow Stream, a national LGBTI association in Indonesia

Aurat

part of the body that has to be covered in public according to Islam (different
for men and women)

Banci

transgender person

Beijing PFA

Platform for Action (of the 1995 Beijing Fourth World Conference on Women)

CAT

Convention Against Torture

CEDAW

Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women

CIL

Compilation of Islamic Law

CRC

Convention on the Rights of the Child

Dangdut

popular romantic style of music

Fatwa

Muslim advice or decision, usually issued by the MUI

FGD

Focus Group Discussion

Fiqih

Islamic jurisprudence

FJI

Front Jihad Islam

FPI

Front Pembela Islam, Islam Defenders’ Front

FTM

Female To Male

FUI

Forum Umat Islam, Forum of the Muslim community

GAM

Gerakan Aceh Merdeka, Free Aceh Movement

Gemblak

young effeminate boys who are helpers of the warok

GOI

Government of Indonesia

Halal

acceptable according to Islam (for instance food)

Haram

forbidden according to Islam

Hijab

Muslim dress for women, intended to cover their aurat

HIV/AIDS

Human Immunodeficiency Virus/Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome

HTI

Hizbut Tahrir Indonesia

HRC

Human Rights Committee

Ibadah

Religious obligations, such as sholat (prescribed prayers) and fasting

ICESCR

International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights

ICCPR

International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights

ICPD

International Conference on Population and Development

G l o s s a r y

local customs

C r i m i n a l i s a t i o n

Adat

C r e e p i n g

Glossary
& Acronyms

8

C r e e p i n g
C r i m i n a l i s a t i o n

IS

Islamic State

Jilbab

headdress for Muslim women

Jin

(evil) spirit

Jinayah

criminal law

Kabupaten

district (headed by a bupati)

Kerudung

loose scarf worn by women

Kesusilaan

public morality

Khalwat

immoral conduct

Khamar

drinking alcohol

Komnas HAM

Komisi Nasional Hak Asasi Manusia, National Human Rights Commission

Komnas

Komisi Nasional anti Kekerasan terhadap Perempuan, National Commission

Perempuan

on Violence Against Women

G l o s s a r y

KPI

Komisi Penyiaran Indonesia, Indonesian Broadcasting Commission

KUHAP

Kitab Undang-Undang Hukum Acara Pidana, Law of Criminal Procedures

KUHP

Kitab Undang-Undang Hukum Pidana, Penal Code

LBH

Lembaga Bantuan Hukum, Institution for Legal Aid

LGBTIQ

Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgender, Intersex, Queer

Liwath

sodomy

Ludruk

popular form of theatre

Mahdah

particular form of Islamic worship

Mahram

(also spelled muhrim), relatives

Mairil

young male student in pesantren, used for sexual gratification by one or more
of his religious teachers

Maisir

(main) gambling

Maksiat

sin (refers to individual sin)

Mesum

immoral conduct

Ministry of

Women’s Empowerment and Child Protection

WECP
MoU

Memorandum of Understanding

MPR

Majelis Permusyawaratan Rakyat, People’s Consultative Council

MUI

Majelis Ulama Indonesia, Council of Indonesian Islamic Scholars

Musahaqah

consensual lesbian sex

NU

Nahdlatul Ulama, Islamic scholars

OIC

Organisation of Islamic Cooperation

PBNU

Pengurus Besar Nahdlatul Ulama, Governing Board of the Nahdlatul Ulama

Pelacuran

prostitution

Persenggamaan deviant sexual relations
menyimpang
Pesantren

Islamic boarding school

PKB

Partai Kebangkitan Bangsa Nasional, National Awakening Party

PKI

Partai Komunis Indonesia, Indonesian Communist Party

PKS

Partai Keadilan Sejahtera, Prosperous Justice Party

POA

Programme of Action (of the 1994 ICPD Conference)

9

Peraturan Pemerintah, Government Regulation

PPUU

Peraturan Perundang-undangan, the Process and Procedure for making
Regulations
thug

PSK

Pekerja Seks Komersial, commercial sex worker

Qanun

regulation

RA

Raden Adjeng (princess)

Santri

(former) student of pesantren

SGRC UI

Support Group and Resource Centre on Sexuality Studies at the Universitas
Indonesia in Jakarta
prescribed Muslim prayers

Sihaq

rubbing of body parts (in same sex relationships between women)

Sirri

religious marriage, marriage that’s not legally registered

Syair

teaching public awareness of Islam

UDHR

Universal Declaration of Human Rights

Ulama

religious leader

UNDP

United Nations Development Programme

UNFPA

United Nations Population Fund

UNDIP

Universitas Diponegoro (in Semarang)

UNILA

University of Lampung

Waria

male to female (MTF) transgender

Warok

male dancer with magical power in the reyog tradition, his helpers are
gemblak, young effeminate boys

WH

Wilayatul Hisbah – Aceh Sharia police

WTS

Wanita Tuna Susila, woman without morals

Wayang

a form of theatrical performance

Zina

adultery

G l o s s a r y

Sholat

C r i m i n a l i s a t i o n

Preman

C r e e p i n g

PP

10

C r e e p i n g

Introduction

C r i m i n a l i s a t i o n

This report by OutRight Action International, Creeping

Criminalisation: Mapping of Indonesia’s National Laws
And Regional Regulations That Violate Human Rights

I n t r o d u c t i o n

of Women and LGBTIQ People maps the impact of
discriminatory legislation on the rights of LGBTIQ people
and women in Indonesia.

Fundamentally, all people—women, lesbian,

of 2008 became the first national law to

gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex

contain specific discriminatory language

people—should enjoy full human rights

against homosexuality and lesbianism. Several

without discrimination. Inalienable human

laws such as the Health and the Marriage

rights and the principle of non-discrimination

law in particular contain discriminatory

are enshrined in countless international

passages to women and do not recognize the

instruments, providing for a wide scope

needs and rights of LGBTI people.7 There are

in application. Human rights principles in

currently no laws that support the rights of

Indonesia are embedded at the national level

LGBTIQ people and no laws that specifically

in the 1945 Constitution, especially in Section

prohibit the discrimination of women and

X on human rights in the Law on Human

LGBTIQ people.

Rights No. 39/1999. However, in a patriarchal
heteronormative society such as in Indonesia,

An assessment by Arus Pelangi, a leading

women and people who live non-normative

national LGBTI organization in Indonesia,

lives continue to be discriminated against and

revealed that discrimination and gender

their rights restricted.

based violence, especially against LGBTIQ
people, is rampant and impacts many aspects

At the national level homosexuality is not

of LGBTIQ people’s lives.8 Arus Pelangi notes

overtly criminalised, however laws exist

that a biased, patriarchal understanding

that infringe on the rights of LGBTIQ

of culture and religion, strengthened by a

Indonesians. The Anti-Pornography Law

discourse heavily influenced by religious

7

For the Marriage and Health laws see Nursyahbani Katjasungkana and Saskia E. Wieringa, 2003, Sexual Politics and Reproductive Rights in Indonesia, in
Development, Society for International Development Vol 46, no. 2, 63 – 67.
8 The association Arus Pelangi was set up in 2006; it is one of the largest LGBTI organisations in Indonesia.

11

conservatives, influences the drafting and
and regional bylaws/regulations.
Annual reports of the National Commission

Perempuan) also indicate that violence
against women in Indonesia is rampant
and recent legislation adversely affects
women’s rights.

In Creeping Criminalisation: Mapping of

Indonesia’s National Laws And Regional
Regulations That Violate Human Rights of
Women and LGBTIQ People we outline the
commonalities and specificities of violations
of the rights of LGBTIQ groups and women.
We show how discrimination against women
is intricately interwoven with discrimination
on the basis of non-conforming sexual
orientation, gender identity and gender
expression (SOGIE).

I n t r o d u c t i o n

There are currently no laws
that support the rights of
LGBTIQ people and no laws
that specifically prohibit the
discrimination of women and
LGBTIQ people.

C r i m i n a l i s a t i o n

on Violence Against Women (Komnas

C r e e p i n g

codification of discriminatory national laws

12

C r e e p i n g

Methodology

C r i m i n a l i s a t i o n

This report is built on case material collected by Arus

Pelangi and Komnas Perempuan, and supported by materials
from Ardhanary Institute, Indonesian Women’s Association

M e t h o d o l o g y

for Justice (Lembaga Bantuan Hukum Asosiasi Perempuan

Indonesia untuk Keadilan), LBH APIK (a national network of
women’s legal aid bureaus), OurVoice, and LBH Jakarta.9

During the period of writing Creeping

While a few case studies are highlighted as

Criminalisation two Focus Group Discussions

illustrations, this report does not cover the

(FGDs) were convened in Jakarta for

overall conditions contributing to violence

lawyers, law professors, activists, human

and inequalities for Indonesian LGBTI people

rights commissioners and women’s rights

and women in general.

commissioners. In the first FGD, in December
2015, the legal mapping draft framework was
outlined. In the second, in February 2016,
the legal analysis of the report was discussed
and recommendations for stakeholders were

Foundational Material
and Findings

drawn. A third FGD will be held in Indonesia

Since 2010, Komnas Perempuan (National

to share results of the published report.

Commission on Violence Against Women) has
compiled a list of national laws and regional

Interviews with key informants were

regulations that discriminate against women

not held as this report focuses on legal

on the basis of sex. In its 2015 Fact Sheet,

analysis and not on social attitudes. An

the Commission focuses on the effects of

intersectional approach was taken in the

discriminatory regional regulations.

analysis of this report. Women’s rights, LBT
and gay and trans men’s rights were seen as

We found that 318 of the 389 discriminatory

overlapping and complexly interwoven. No

regional regulations identified by Komnas

other intersectional factors were analysed.

Perempuan that curtail the rights of women

Important elements such as class and religion

also negatively impact transgender persons—

are only referred to where relevant.

waria, cross-dressers, transgender (male to

9 Ardhanary Institute is an organization of lesbian and FTM persons; Our Voice is an LGBTI organization.

13

By law, the regional regulations at the bottom

male) men. These regulations infringe on

of this hierarchy cannot contradict laws and

freedom of movement, impose night curfews,

regulations higher up in the hierarchy.

and also regulate the clothes that transgender
people wear and the spaces they can occupy.

Three principles of authority can be

For this report we focused on the

of regional regulations:

discriminatory regional regulations that relate

1.

to eight provinces: Aceh, DKI Jakarta, East
Kalimantan, Lampung, North Sumatera, South
Sulawesi, South Sumatera, and Yogyakarta.
Since many of the regulations we examined

regulations.
2.

Later laws take precedence over earlier
ones.

3. Specific laws take precedence over
general laws.

to region across Indonesia, our findings
and analysis in this report are valid in other

If a law is suspected of conflicting with the

regions of the country beyond the focus of

1945 Constitution, it shall be reviewed by

this report.

the Constitutional Court. If a regulation
below a law is suspected of conflicting with
national laws, it shall be reviewed by the

Legal Framework

Supreme Court.

In this report, Creeping Criminalisation, we

A policy is discriminatory if its contents

assess the legality of the regional regulations

or implementation entails containment,

of eight regions, based on Law No. 10/2004

distinction, elimination or indifference both

(replaced by Law No. 12/2011) on the Process

directly and indirectly, based on differences

and Procedure for making Regulations

between human beings on whatever grounds,

(Peraturan Perundang-undangan/PPUU).

including religion, ethnicity, race, social or
economic status, sex or gender including

According to Article 9 of Law No. 12/2011, the

gender identity and gender expression,

hierarchy of legal instruments in Indonesia is

sexual orientation, language, or political

as follows:

conviction, which results in the reduction,

1.

The 1945 Constitution

divergence or abolition of the recognition,

2.

The People Consultative Decrees

implementation or enjoyment of human

3. Laws or Government Regulations that

rights and the basic freedoms in the lives

replace laws

of individuals or the society in the fields

4.

Government Regulations

of politics, economy, law, social relations,

5.

Presidential Regulations

culture or other aspects of life.10

6. Provincial Regional Regulations
7.

District Regional Regulations

10 Adapted from the definition used by Komnas Perempuan (2015).

M e t h o d o l o g y

are wholly or partly copy-pasted from region

Higher laws take precedence over lower

C r i m i n a l i s a t i o n

established in assessing the legality of Articles

C r e e p i n g

female) women, and transgender (female to

14

C r e e p i n g
C r i m i n a l i s a t i o n

Country
Context

C o u n t r y
C o n t e x t

Regional Autonomy

level regulations and bylaws currently
stand in contradiction to the principles of

Indonesia has 34 provinces, five of which

Indonesia’s secular Constitution, the Supreme

have special status, including Aceh, Jakarta

Court should step in and address the

and Yogyakarta and hundreds of districts

inconsistencies in regional laws to align with

(kabupaten, the number is growing), which

national laws.

are asserting themselves by claiming
autonomy and issuing their own regional

Most of these populist-inspired regulations

regulations. Law No. 22/1999 allowed for the

are based on patriarchal and fundamentalist

decentralization of power. This policy became

(Wahabist Islamic) appeals to ‘tradition,

effective on January 1, 2001.

culture and religion,’ which subordinate
women and LGBTIQ people. As such,

This section provides historical context for

regional regulations do not protect women

the proliferation of regional regulations at the

and LGBTIQ people from SOGI-based

province, district, and city levels in Indonesia.

and gender-based violations. In such an

The section expands on the juxtaposition of

environment, violence and discrimination

regional level bylaws, which are often drafted

against women (including LBT women

to reflect the religiously conservative and

and gay and transgender men) are not

populist values of provincial voters, with

considered crimes, rather violence is often

Indonesian national laws, which are grounded

seen as corrective action and discrimination

in a secular Constitution. The report finds

is seen as deserving, as victims are usually

that provincial level politicians draft or

considered to be offenders of religious and

support more conservative and religiously

cultural norms.

influenced laws, in an effort to gain popularity
with conservative voters, who make up

While the Indonesian Constitution is founded

the majority of all voters, and to remain in

on secular principles, Indonesian politics is

office. The report argues that since regional

often influenced by religion. This is because

15

of a secular constitution, but also on the

to an all time high. President Suharto’s

Pancasila, the philosophical foundation of

successor, Habibie, inherited a volatile nation.

the Indonesian state, where the first sila

He was acutely aware of the extent of regional

(pillar) relates to the Belief in One God. These

discontent. He sought to contain the possible

contradicting values have an impact on

outbreak of regional conflict by granting

legislation, and have allowed for the passing

administrative autonomy to provinces and

of laws that are in fact biased by religion.

districts that had their own governing bodies.

The concrete consequences are that the
their own religious values and fail to protect

People’s Consultative Assembly (MPR) adopted

rights of non-Muslim and secular Indonesian

a decree for the implementation of regional

religious minorities. This has led to the

autonomy. The Ministry of Home Affairs

codification of hundreds of discriminatory

drafted Law No. 22/1999, adopted in May of

regulations and policies, criminalizing and

1999, which was eventually replaced by Law

controlling the lives of LGBTI people, women

No. 32/2004. This allowed for the transfer of

and religious minorities.

authority from the Central government to the
district level. The drafters of Law No. 22/1999
assumed that regional level laws would fall

Political History and
the Impact of Regional
Autonomy

within the framework of the national laws. On

Indonesia is a large, ethnically and religiously

not contradict the Constitution and national

diverse archipelago, where centrifugal

laws. This oversight was corrected in 2011,

tendencies have threatened the harmony

where Law No. 32/2004 explicitly stipulates

of the state. An explanation of this is that

this requirement.

the basis of this assumption, they neglected
to explicitly state in that law (No. 22/1999)
that regional regulations must align with and

Indonesia, as we know it, is the amalgamation
of territories, which were forcibly united

The granting of regional autonomy on

by Dutch colonization. Disparate ideologies

specific grounds (such as public work,

have materialized into civil discontent with

health, education and culture and economic

the state at various points in Indonesian

sectors such as forestry) had two intended

history. Government leaders have deployed

effects. Firstly, it answered the call for more

a range of efforts to contain civil discontent;

democracy in the regions removing potential

most notable is former Indonesian President

reasons for regional unrest. Secondly, in

General Suharto, whose thirty-two year

bypassing the provinces generally large

authoritarian reign saw the restriction of civil

enough to become independent entities,

liberties and massive violations of human

it encouraged collaboration among small

rights against civilians.

districts and ultimately increased the ties of
these districts with the national level.

The abrupt departure of President Suharto
in 1998 was a critical moment in Indonesian

There were also many unintended effects

history. Notably, by the end of the 1990s

to granting regional autonomy. When the

C o n t e x t

By November 1998 the Special Session of the

C o u n t r y

drafters of the regional regulations prioritize

C r i m i n a l i s a t i o n

corruption and civil discontent had risen
C r e e p i n g

the State is not only based on the foundation

16

C r e e p i n g

Law on Regional Governance came into

This new law mentions that the revocation of

effect on January 1, 2001, the national legal

regional regulations at the level of a district

framework within which regional autonomy

or city is delegated to the governor as the

could happen was far from ready. Ambiguities

representative of the central government

and conflicts of authority arose between

and that the governor can issue a Decision

C r i m i n a l i s a t i o n

district and provincial councils, and between

of the Governor in that respect. However if

national bodies and district level authorities.

the governor fails to revoke such regional

11

C o u n t r y

Consequently, while this Law (No. 32/2004)

regulation at the district or city level, the

granted more authority to the provinces,

Minister of Home Affairs can do so. In other

the proliferation of laws created at so many

words, regional regulations must fall within

different levels—province, district, city—

the national legal framework; the Ministry of

contributed to legal confusion, or as some

Home Affairs and the Provincial Governors

called it, ‘legal disorder’.

have the power to annul elements of the

12

C o n t e x t

Indonesia, as we know it,
is the amalgamation of
territories, which were
forcibly united by Dutch
colonization.

regulations, which are not in line with the
Constitution or other national laws. To date,
this has not happened. The Supreme Court,
with the power to revoke regional regulations
that are not in line with the Constitution, has
not done so since the Court can only give
decisions based on case examination, unlike
the Minister of Home Affairs or Governors.

Recognizing the inconsistencies of regional
laws with the Constitution and national
regulations, the Minister of Home Affairs
again changed the Law on Regional
Governance in 2014 (No. 23/2014). In
paragraph 251- 2e this law explicitly states
that: ‘regional policies are not allowed to
contradict higher level regulations and
common interests nor can they be allowed
to discriminate on the basis of ethnicity,
religion, belief, race, gender and relations
among groups’. As sexual orientation, gender
identity and gender expression (SOGIE) are
not mentioned it is implied that these are
acceptable grounds for discrimination.

11 There are many studies on the politics of regional autonomy in Indonesia. One of the best studies is Harold Crouch. 2010. Political Reform in Indonesia after
Soeharto. Singapore: ISEAS.
12 See Simon Butt. 2010. Regional Autonomy and Legal Disorder: the proliferation of local laws in Indonesia. Sydney Law Review vol. 32. pp 176-192 for a
discussion of this legal disorder. After analysing the decisions of the Supreme Court he concluded that only in case of illegal taxation of user charges the
judicial review process was successful.

17

C r e e p i n g

Human
Rights

C r i m i n a l i s a t i o n

Overview

Islam. This contextual information should supplement
the outline and mapping of Indonesia’s national and
regional laws as well as shed light on social attitudes,
which impact laws and regulations.

Human Rights and
Indonesia

propaganda, sexual slander of communistaffiliated women and girls were employed
and accusations that the Partai Komunis

In Indonesia, it is important to recognize

Indonesia (PKI, Indonesian Communist Party)

that human rights are not only associated

was anti-religion and anti-Pancasila. Religion

with a secular lifestyle, but also with

was seen as an antidote to communism. This

communism. This became clear in the latter

rhetoric still holds today and accompanies

half of 2015, around the public hearings

religious intolerance, where people who

of the International People’s Tribunal on

advocate a liberal, pluralist, human rights

the 1965 massacre (November 10-13, 2015),

based interpretation of Islam, are associated

and other events commemorating the 50

with apostasy. Their interpretation of Islam is

years of silence and impunity after October

seen as an attack on Islam as religion, stifling

1, 1965, which was the start of the mass

internal Muslim debates.

murder in the country. In anti-communist
13

13 See Final Report on the hearings at www.tribunal1965.org

O v e r v i e w

postcolonial amnesia, and secondly human rights and

R i g h t s

Indonesia: firstly, gender diversity in Indonesia and

H u m a n

This section discusses human rights in the context of

18

C r e e p i n g
C r i m i n a l i s a t i o n

It has to be stressed that the first pillar of

lesbian and gay people are overwhelming the

the Pancasila (Belief in One God) and the

university campuses, ‘Particularly if these

Article in the Constitution regarding religious

lesbian and gay people have already formed

freedom (Article 29) should not erase other

a social movement, which is constructed as

freedoms, which are guaranteed in the

a pretext of human rights’. Haedar stressed

Constitution. The right to gender expression

that lesbian and gay people are not accepted

should not be bridled in the name of Belief

in Indonesia as Indonesia is not a secular

in One God and Article 29 because rights

country, but a country that is based on the

that are guaranteed in the Constitution

Pancasila, particularly the first sila, which

cannot be erased, not even by other

stresses Belief in One God.14

constitutional provisions.
That the Pancasila15 also contains pillars

H u m a n
R i g h t s
O v e r v i e w

Indonesia has ratified the
major international human
rights conventions and is
bound by international human
rights law, which elaborate
rights and freedoms that all
human beings are entitled to,
including the rights to freedom
from discrimination, equality
before the law and equal
protection of the law.

that stress human rights (‘just and civilized

Recently the General Chair of the

Thus the opinion of Haedar Nashir and many

Muhammadyah (the second largest Muslim

other leaders in the community do not stand

mass organization in Indonesia), Haedar

in line with the viewpoint of the Constitution.

humanity’), democracy and social justice
are ignored by this religious leader. He also
ignores the fact that Indonesia has a secular
Constitution. Nor does he consider that
Indonesia has ratified the major international
human rights conventions and is bound
by international human rights law, which
elaborate rights and freedoms that all human
beings are entitled to, including the rights to
freedom from discrimination, equality before
the law and equal protection of the law, which
constitute basic and general principles for
protection of human rights.

Nashir, was quoted in an interview in the
conservative Muslim journal Republika.
This interview indicates that influential,
conservative Indonesians feel that though

Human Rights and Islam

Indonesia is not formally a religious state,

Conservative interpretations of Islam such as

neither is it secular, and that human rights

those by the Majelis Ulama Indonesia (MUI,

have no place in the country. In Haedar’s view,

Indonesian Council of Islamic Scholars), the

14 http://www.republika.co.id/berita/nasional/umum/16/01/26/o1ji4w365-muhammadiyah-pastikan-lgbt-tak-dibenarkan-ada-di-indonesia
15 The Pancasila is the official state ideology, formulated by the nation’s founders. It consists of 5 principles. 1. Belief in the one and only God (in Indonesian,
Ketuhanan Yang Maha Esa). 2. Just and civilised humanity (in Indonesian, Kemanusiaan Yang Adil dan Beradab). 3. The unity of Indonesia (in Indonesian,
Persatuan Indonesia). 4. Democracy guided by the inner wisdom in the unanimity arising out of deliberations amongst representatives (in Indonesian,
Kerakyatan Yang Dipimpin oleh Hikmat Kebijaksanaan, Dalam Permusyawaratan dan Perwakilan). 5. Social justice for all of the people of Indonesia (in
Indonesian, Keadilan Sosial bagi seluruh Rakyat Indonesia).

19

Muhammadyah and neo-Salafist groups in

carries the death sentence. Liwath carries

Indonesia, stress women’s subordination to

an unspecified sentence because although it

men and the prohibition of homosexuality as

is considered a sin it does not involve penile

central tenets of that religion. Yet feminist

vaginal penetration and there is no danger of

Muslim scholars such as Fatima Mernissi

pregnancy. Proving liwath and zina is difficult

and Musdah Mulia stress the sex-affirmative

since four live witnesses must testify. If

statements in the Qur’an, a sign of God’s

someone denounces another person for zina

mercy and generosity towards humanity,

or liwath and proof is insufficient, he or she

characterised by such valued qualities as love

can get 80 lashes with the whip.

16

and beauty. Based on similar interpretations
17

as such are not prohibited in Islam, only anal

rights and Islam. In their interpretation,

sex (based on the interpretation of Al Baqarah

the story of the prophet Luth, always cited

222-223), which is considered forbidden

as evidence of the Islamic and Christian

(haram) and is prohibited in both homosexual

God’s condemnation of homosexuality, is

and heterosexual contexts. Sexual orientation

related to sexual violence and disobedience

itself is not discussed in fiqih. Furthermore,

and not as many classical religious scholars

while religious hard-liners call homosexuality

state, is God’s prohibition of homosexuality.

a sin, many religious conservatives proclaim

Mernissi, Mulia and other Muslim scholars

homosexuality is an illness. The Quran does

maintain that the punishment for the

not consider sicknesses as sin, and thus it

followers of the prophet Luth was due

should not be considered as such.19

18

to aggressive behaviour towards their
guests, in this case, adultery and rape.

The conservative MUI has issued several
religious edits (fatwa) declaring that

Hard-liner Muslims insist that homosexuality

homosexuality is haram. In 2014 the MUI

is prohibited in Islam, however the word

issued fatwa (57/2014), which declared LGBT

‘homosexuality’ does not exist in classical

communities to be ‘religiously, culturally and

Arabic. What does exist is liwath, sodomy,

morally deviant’. In March 2015 a warning

which itself does not mean homosexuality,

was issued that LGBT people should get

as it includes heterosexual anal intercourse

the death sentence. In 2016 a new fatwa

and excludes lesbianism. The word associated

was issued to ban Muslims from joining any

with lesbianism is sihaq, rubbing, and there

groups promoting LGBT rights in Indonesia.

is no punishment associated with sihaq.

In February 2016 the MUI called upon the

The only punishment stipulated in classical

government to draft a bill prohibiting LGBT

16 The NU and the Muhammadyah are both Islamic mass organisations with millions of members. The NU is more traditional and is considered to be more
tolerant than the modernist Muhammadyah.
17 See Fatima Mernissi, 1985, Beyond the Veil; Male-Female Dynamics in Modern Muslim Society. London: Saki 1985. Musdah Mulia. 2005. Muslimah Reformis,
Perempuan Pembaru Keagamaan. Bandung: Mizan. Wieringa 2015.
18 See for instance Mahnaz Afkhani ed.1995. Faith & Freedom; Women;s Human Rights in the Muslim World. London: Tauris. Musdah Mulia. 2012.
Contesting Fundamentalism: Humanizing Women in Nursyahbani Katjasungkana and Saskia E. Wieringa eds The Future of Asian Feminisms; Confronting
Fundamentalism, Conflicts and Neo-liberalism. Newcastle-upon-Thyme Cambridge Scholars Publ. pp 284-300.
19 For a further discussion on homosexuality and fiqih see https://azisaf.wordpress.com/2016/02/18/homoseksualitas-dan-fikih/

O v e r v i e w

no incompatibility between human and sexual

R i g h t s

So homosexual orientation and relationships
H u m a n

of the Qur’an several scholars stress there is

C r i m i n a l i s a t i o n

Islamic law (fiqih) is for adultery, zina, which
C r e e p i n g

Nahdlatul Ulama (NU, Islamic Scholars), the

20

activities.20 Although the MUI is not an
C r e e p i n g

authoritative body, its fatwas, which are not
binding, are influential. Hard-liner groups
justify their violence by quoting these fatwas.

Gender Diversity in
Indonesia and Post
Colonial Amnesia

C r i m i n a l i s a t i o n

Not all religious scholars are so aggressive.

Culturally, the existence of gender ambiguous

An advisor at the MUI, Din Syamsuddin, said

individuals plays an important role in some

that though same sex relationships violate

ethnic groups in Indonesia, as indeed in

the human right to reproduce and thus were

various places in Asia. In several ethnic

haram, Muslims should not show hatred for

communities in present-day Indonesia

the LGBT community.

there are traces of gender pluralism and

21

diversity. The Hindu deity Ardhanarishvara

H u m a n
R i g h t s
O v e r v i e w

Culturally, the existence of
gender ambiguous individuals
plays an important role
in some ethnic groups in
Indonesia, as indeed in
various places in Asia.

(or Ardhanary) after which the Indonesian

Hate mongering has led to contradictory

the gods and that of humans, just as they

understandings of homosexuality. On the

transcend femininity and masculinity.23 A

one hand homosexuality is seen as a disease,

well-known example of gender pluralism is

to be cured by religious counselling and

the five-gender system of the Bugis people of

rehabilitation—for instance by reciting the

Sulawesi island.24

lesbian support group, the Ardhanary
Institute is named, is an example. This
popular god in Hindu times combines the
female and male principles (Durga and Shiva,
respectively). There are also several examples
of transgender healers, who were considered
to be able to mediate between the world of

Qur’an close to and over the head of LGBTIQ
persons in the expectation that the nerves

Male-bodied individuals dressing in women’s

will change. On the other hand, LGBTIQ

clothing and intersex persons were seen to be

persons who seek religion are denied that

powerful spirit mediators. The anthropologist

right. In February 2016, the one religious

Van der Kroef describes transvestite

school in the world for waria and FTM

traditions among the indigenous Ngaju

transgender people in Yogyakarta was forced

Dayak (basir) of Kalimantan in the southern

to close its doors following protests from an

part of Borneo island, the Bare’e Toraja

organization that calls itself the Islamic Jihad

of Central Sulawesi province in Eastern

Front. There were about 40 waria enrolled in

Indonesia, and the Makassarese of South

the school, which opened in 2008. (See profile

Sulawesi province on Sulawesi island. The

in this report about the closing of this school).

Bare’e Toraja recognized male status based

22

20
21
22
23

See for instance http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2016/02/17/indonesian-clerics-declare-lgbt-groups-haram.html
https://m.tempo.co/read/news/2016/03/05/173750992/din-syamsuddin-lgbt-jangan-dimusuhi
http://www.abualbanicentre.com/rehabilitasi-kelainan-orientasi-sexual
See Wieringa 2015, Heteronormativity, Passionate Aesthetics and Symbolic Subversion in Asia. Eastbourne: Sussex Academic Publishers and Evelyn
Blackwood 2005 Gender Transgression in Colonial and Postcolonial Indonesia in the Journal of Asian Studies 64/4 pp 849-879.
24 See for instance Sharyn Graham Davies, 2010, Gender Diversity in Indonesia; Sexuality, Islam and Queer Selves. London and New York: Routledge. Lily
Sugianto, 2015, Eksistensi Calalai Dalam Budaya Sulawesi Selatan. Jakarta: Ardhanary Institute.

21

to engage in warfare were labeled as bujasa

were kept in a ‘golden cage’ (see writings

and encouraged to take on an alternative

of RA Kartini).28 These assignations were

role as a gender ambiguous shaman. The

however not respected under Dutch law.

transgender manang bali among the Iban

In 1915 the Dutch imposed the Concord

people of Kalimantan wore women’s clothes

Principle on Indonesia in which women’s legal

and took husbands.

dependence on their husbands was formalised

25

for the first time.29 The Dutch also introduced
legal regimes for European, indigenous

ritual performances such as the traditional

(pribumi) people and ‘other Orientals’. This

theatrical performances of warok-gemblak

opened up the way for Sharia law to be

of East Java and ludruk of Central and

adopted by Muslim communities.30 The

East Java.26 In Bali, it is common to find

legal confusion created by having different

cross gender role-playing in traditional

legal systems, particularly with regard to

performances. For instance, in the Arja

marriage and inheritance laws has still not

Balinese dance drama, men act as female

been cleared up. There is no secular law that

impersonators, and more recently, women

gives women and men equal inheritance

have taken part as male impersonators.

rights and make it difficult for parents to

In the wayang theatre of Java, often male

disinherit children. An example of the pitfalls

characters are played by female actresses

of not having equivalent secular laws is that

or vice versa.

parents can disinherit their LGBTIQ children

27

at will and they can discriminate against their
There is no indication that same sex relations
and gender variance were ever criminalised
in the various ethnic groups of which the precolonial archipelago consisted.
Women’s position has varied in diverse
kinship systems. In some groups such as the
bilinear majority Javanese, women enjoyed
various economic and some political rights.

daughters when it comes to inheritance.

Individuals expressing
ambiguous gender often play
a central role even today in
ritual performances such
as the traditional theatrical
performances.

25 Cited in Richard Howard,. 1996. Falling Into the Gay World: Manhood, Marriage and Family in Indonesia. PhD thesis, University of Illinois, UrbanaChampaign pp 339-341. See also Leonard Y Andaya, 2000, The Bissu: Study of a Third Gender in Indonesia. In: Barbara Watson Andaya ed. Other Pasts,
Women, Gender and History in Early Modern Southeast Asia. Manoa: University of Hawai’i. pp 27-47.
There is a wide literature on this, see for instance Dede Oetomo. 1996. Gender and Sexual Orientation in Indonesia in Laurie Sears ed Fantasizing The
Feminine in Indonesia. Durham: Duke University Press, pp 259-269. Dede Oetomo, 2001, Memberi Suara Kepada yang Bisu. Yogyakarta: Galang Press. James
Peacock, 1967. Javanese Clown and Transvestite Songs: Some Relations Between ‘Primitive Classification’ and ‘Communicative Events’. June Helm, ed. Essays
on the Verbal and Visual Arts: Proceedings of the 1966 Spring Meeting, American Ethnological Society. Seattle.
Tom Boellstorff, 2005, The Gay Archipelago; Sexuality and Nation in Indonesia. Princeton: Princeton University Press. Michael G. Peletz, 2009, Gender
Pluralism; Southeast Asia since Early Modern Times. New York and London: Routledge.;Ian Douglas Wilson. 2008. As Long as It’s Halal; Islamic Preman in
Jakarta. In Greg Fealy and Sally White eds: Expressing Islam; Religious Life and Politics in Indonesia. Singapore: ISEAS. pp 192-211.
27 I Wayan Dibia. 2005. Silang Gender dalam Dramatari Arja di Bali. Didik Nini Thowok ed. Cross Gender. Malang: Sava Media. pp 77-88.
28 See RA Kartini 1987 Brieven aan Mevrouw R.M. Abendanon-Mandri en haar Echtgenoot met andere Documenten, bezorgd door F.G.P. Jaquet. Dordrecht:
Foris.
29 See Saskia E. Wieringa, 2015, Heteronormativity, Passionate Aesthetics and Symbolic Subversion in Asia. Brighton: Sussex Academic Press. pp 75. a.f.
30 Katjasungkana 2012, The Grip of Fundamentalism and the Indonesia Legal System in The Future of Asian Feminisms: Confronting Fundamentalisms,
Conflicts and neo-Liberalism, Cambridge Scholarly Publishing pp 320-347.

O v e r v i e w

often play a central role even today in

R i g h t s

ethnic-religious legislation with different

H u m a n

Individuals expressing ambiguous gender

C r i m i n a l i s a t i o n

This did not apply to upper class women who
C r e e p i n g

on participation in warfare. Men who refused

22

C r e e p i n g

The introduction of Islam and Christianity

tolerance of particular transgender practices

brought with it notions of sin, guilt and

(for instance, non-conforming gender

normative heterosexuality, which transposed

expression and social interactions) have

transgender patterns and same sex

remained until recently. The following is an

behaviours into the realm of the moral. Yet,

example of a good practice:

C r i m i n a l i s a t i o n

In 1973 Iwan Robbyanto Iskandar (originally Khan Kok Hian), born in a male body, was the
first person to legally change his identity. Since he was five years old Iwan knew he was
actually a girl. In 1973 he decided to have gender reassignment surgery in the University
Hospital in Singapore. When he came back to Jakarta he submitted a request to the
State Court of West Jakarta to change his gender status on his legal documents and be

H u m a n

registered as a woman by the name of Vivian Rubianti Iskandar. LBH (Legal Aid Foundation)
Jakarta helped him. His lawyer, Adnan Buyung Nasution, was accused of blasphemy by

R i g h t s

Muslim groups who called Adnan an apostate. There was much social unrest in regards
to his case. Yet the court granted Vivian her wish, with decision 546/Pdt.P/1973. The
judges reasoned that this decision was necessary in order to be able to arrange matters

O v e r v i e w

related to marriage, inheritance or labour contracts, or even to deal with judicial matters
since the law only recognized a man or a woman. Although at that time the law did not
yet accommodate sex changes, Iwan was able to change his name because of Article 5a-12
in the Civil Code juncto Law No. 4/1961 on Name Changes. After this case other courts in
Indonesia (Surabaya in 1998 and Batan in 2009) also granted requests for changed gender
status.31 In 1975 a film was made, titled ‘I am Vivian’, directed by M. Endraatmadja. In 1998
Vivian married Felix Rumayar.

31 Rentang Jejak LBH Jakarta; Kisah-kisah Penanganan Kasus. Jakarta: LBH Jakarta, 2015: pp. 22-23.

23

case of Karla and Dumani, as discussed below,

For instance the terms banci and waria have

shows a more negative side of attitudes

taken on negative connotations in the media

towards the LGBTIQ community. This is

and are used to stigmatize transgender

perhaps due to the proliferation of anti-LGBT

persons. These words are originally Javanese

regional regulations that criminalise them

terms that were used to describe both male-

and invite the public to take the law into

to-female and female-to-male transgender

their own hands, resulting in violence against

people, with a neutral connotation.

LGBTIQ people and rejection of various forms

C r i m i n a l i s a t i o n

of gender that in the past were accepted.
C r e e p i n g

In contrast to Vivian’s case, the more recent

In early October 2015, Ratu Airin (Karla), who was born male, and Dumani, decided to
where they were both working after the tsunami of 2004. When they came back to their
a wedding, with Karla in traditional woman’s dress with a knot decorated with jasmine
flowers while Dumani was dressed in the traditional men’s jacket and Muslim cap. He
born male, the couple had not applied for a wedding permit. Yet villagers came to their
wedding ceremony and even village officials made their appearance. All went well, gifts
were exchanged and food was shared. Unfortunately a media uproar followed, bringing the
wedding to the attention of the chair of the fatwa council of Boyolali, Habib Ihsanuddin,
who condemned it as a homosexual relationship. In reaction, Karla and Dumani were
harassed by 300 members of a religious fundamentalist group, Forum Umat Islam Boyolali
(FUIB) who pressured the police to force the couple to sign a statement saying that they
would not live together in the same house. About two weeks later, on October 16, their
food stall was demolished, their source of livelihood destroyed. Dumani was recorded
asking forgiveness from the people of the village for disturbing the security of the people.32

It was the Dutch colonizers who considered

process of ‘postcolonial amnesia’ they ignore

transgender practices and the autonomy

transgender practices and women’s autonomy

that women in general enjoyed as ‘proof’

where it existed and posit an ‘always-already’

of the moral degradation of the indigenous

patriarchal and heteronormative past.33

population and thus legitimizing their
‘civilizing mission’. Postcolonial leaders of
Indonesia while denouncing colonialism have
accepted many moral injunctions originating
from the colonial power holders. In a

32 http://indoprogress.com/2015/12/darino-dumani-kisah-cinta-yang-dibunuh? Accessed January 24, 2016.
33 Saskia E. Wieringa 2009 Postcolonial Amnesia: Sexual Moral Panics, Memory and Imperial Power. In: Gilbert Herdt, ed. Moral Panics, Sex Panics; Fear and
the Fight over Sexual Rights. New York: New York University Press. pp 205-234.

O v e r v i e w

also sported a wreath of jasmine flowers around his shoulders. However as Karla was

R i g h t s

village in Boyolali they set up a successful food stall. They staged their thanksgiving as

H u m a n

hold a thanksgiving ceremony for their union of seven years. They had met in Aceh,

24

C r e e p i n g

International

C r i m i n a l i s a t i o n

Laws

I n t e r n a t i o n a l

This section contains assessments of international treaties

L a w s

Forms of Discrimination Against Women, which articulate

and legal instruments such as the Universal Declaration of
Human Rights and the Convention on the Elimination of All
the fundamental rights of all human beings, which includes
women and LGBTIQ people. These are the laws that
Indonesia’s national level laws must abide by, and in turn
Indonesia’s regional laws.

Mapping of International
Legal Instruments to
Advance Women’s
and LGBTIQ Rights

Human Rights (UDHR), the ICCPR, CEDAW
and the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), the
International Convention on the Rights of
the Child, (CRC), and the Convention Against

International legal instruments outline

Torture (CAT)—all of which are ratified by the

Indonesia’s obligation to respect all citizens’

government of Indonesia.

rights free from discrimination and to
promote equality before the law and equal

The related rights to equality before the

protection of the law. The prohibited

law and to equal protection of the law

grounds for discrimination include ‘sex’

without discrimination are also recognised

and ‘other status’.

in the UDHR and the ICCPR (Article 26).

34

Discrimination is understood as any
The principle of non-discrimination is

distinction, exclusion, restriction or

recognised in the Universal Declaration of

preference, based on a long list of proscribed

34 See for a fuller discussion the report by the Asia Pacific Forum 2010.

25

ICCPR guarantees freedom of movement and

nullifying or impairing the recognition,

of location, privacy, freedom of expression

enjoyment or exercise by all persons, on an

and religion, of association, of marrying and

equal footing, of all rights and freedoms. The

forming a family and of political participation.

35

the obligation of states to prevent discrimination.
Article 26 and Articles 2, 3, 7, 9, 14, 17, 18, 19, 22, 24, 26 of ICCPR (1966)

C r i m i n a l i s a t i o n

The following list identifies major Articles that guarantee equal rights of all citizens and

C r e e p i n g

grounds, for the purpose or effect of

Article 2 of CRC (1989)

Articles 2,10, 11, 12, 13 of CEDAW (1979)
Articles 2, 3, 7, 12, 13, 14 of ICESCR (1966)
International Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (ICERD

I n t e r n a t i o n a l

Article 1 of CAT (1984)

L a w s

1965)

The 1994 Cairo Plan of Action (ICPD-POA)

PFA, Paragraph 96 of the PFA acknowledges

and the 1995 Beijing Platform for Action

sexuality is basic to the enjoyment of women’s

(PFA, Fourth World Conference on Women)

rights and women (including lesbians and

are international consensus documents,

bisexual women) have the right to have

which Indonesia has adopted. The Cairo

control over and decide freely and responsibly

Plan of Action includes women’s right to

on matters related to their sexuality without

self-determination (over their body and

coercion, discrimination and violence.

sexuality) and stipulates that all human
beings should be able to lead a satisfying and

In order for a State to guarantee rights

safe sex life; this includes LGBTIQ people.

without discrimination of any kind the State

This is the most progressive definition on

must first ensure that its Constitution, laws

sexuality in any international document. The

and policy documents do not discriminate

Beijing Platform for Action contains more

on prohibited grounds. Secondly, a State

conservative language on women’s sexuality

must adopt necessary measures to prevent,

following bitter struggles and interventions

diminish and eliminate the conditions

by a conservative coalition led by the Vatican

and attitudes, which cause or perpetuate

and the Organization for Islamic Conference

discrimination. A State may adopt special

(OIC, currently known as Organization for

measures to attenuate or suppress conditions

Islamic Cooperation). Although the term

that perpetuate discrimination.36

‘sexual orientation’ was removed from the
35 Human Rights Committee, General Comment No. 18: Non-discrimination, (Article 7). APF.

26

Specifically, the UN Human Rights Committee
C r e e p i n g

(HRC) charged with interpreting the ICCPR
states that the right to equality prohibits
discrimination in law or in fact in any field
regulated and protected by public authorities,

C r i m i n a l i s a t i o n

and that the State shall guarantee to all
persons equal and effective protection against
discrimination on any of the enumerated
grounds. In addition, the State may also be
held to have violated rights where it fails to
prevent, punish, investigate or redress harm
caused by private persons or entities.37

I n t e r n a t i o n a l

In September 2015 twelve United Nations
entities called on States to act urgently to
end violence and discrimination against
LGBT people. The statement notes that

L a w s

failure to uphold the human rights of LGBT
people and to protect them against abuses
such as violence and discriminatory laws and
practices, constitute serious violations of
international human rights law and have a farreaching impact on society—contributing to
increased vulnerability to ill health including
HIV infection, social and economic exclusion,
putting strain on families and communities,
and impacting negatively on economic
growth, decent work and progress towards
achievement of the future Sustainable
Development Goals. The signatories include
the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA).
In contradiction to this statement the UNFPA
is supporting the Indonesian Ministry of
Women’s Empowerment and Child Protection,
contributing to its heteronormative and
gender-discriminatory programme of gender
harmony. See Annex 1 on stakeholders.38

36 Human Rights Committee, General Comment No. 18. Human Rights Committee, General Comment No. 31. Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural
Rights, General Comment No. 20.
37 Human Rights Committee, General Comment No. 18: Non-discrimination, (Article 12). See also report of the Asia Pacific Forum, 2010.
38 See Saskia E. Wieringa 2015b Gender harmony and the happy family; Islam, gender and sexuality in post-reformasi Indonesia. Journal of South East Asian
Research. Vol. 23 nr 1 pp 5-27.

27

C r e e p i n g

National

C r i m i n a l i s a t i o n

Laws

orientation, will be presented such as the Constitution,
the Criminal Code, the Civil Code, the 1974 Marriage Law,
the 2008 Anti Pornography Law, the 2006 Population
Administration Law, the 2009 Health Law and relevant
national regulations, such as on adoption (No. 54/2007), civil
registration (No. 25/2008), psychological health and well
being, including the 2013 regulation on the employment of
civil servants (Pengadilan-001/C.4/Cp2/09/2013).

While an exhaustive analysis of all laws and

should in no way contradict these laws. It is

regulations at the national level in relation to

the obligation of the Constitutional Court

gender, sex and sexuality is beyond the scope

and Indonesia’s government leaders to

of this report, below are most important

ensure that regional level laws are in line with

points of reference for the analysis of the

national laws, and where they are not, they

regional regulations in the provinces that

must be challenged and amended to meet

are the focus of this report. It is important to

the standards of Indonesia’s Constitution and

recognize that all regional level laws should

Civil and Criminal Codes.

be in compliance with national laws, and

L a w s

women’s and LGBTIQ rights, gender identity and sexual

N a t i o n a l

In this section the Indonesian national legal framework on

28

C r e e p i n g

The Indonesian
Constitution39

Article 28D: every person shall have the
right of recognition, guarantees, protection
and certainty before a just law, and of equal

C r i m i n a l i s a t i o n

The 1945 Indonesian Constitution consists

treatment before the law; every person shall

of 16 chapters and 37 Articles of which

have the right to work and to receive a fair

there is one chapter on human rights

and proper compensation and treatment in

that has 40 provisions. The Indonesian

employment; every citizen shall have the right

Constitution is the standard to which

to obtain equal opportunities in government;

national and regional laws must comply.

and every person shall have the right to

The most important of these that concern

citizenship status.

LGBTIQ and women are the following.
Article 28H: every person shall have the right

N a t i o n a l
L a w s

Article 27: all citizens shall be equal before

to live in physical and spiritual prosperity, to

the law and the government and shall

have a home and to enjoy a good and healthy

be required to respect the law and the

environment, and shall have the right to

government, with no exceptions; every citizen

obtain medical care; every person shall have

shall have the right to work and to earn a

the right to receive facilitation and special

humane livelihood; and each citizen shall have

treatment to have the same opportunity

the right and duty to participate in the effort

and benefit in order to achieve equality and

of defending the state.

fairness; every person shall have the right to
social security in order to develop oneself

Article 28B: every person shall have the

fully as a dignified human being; and every

right to establish a family and to procreate

person shall have the right to own personal

based upon lawful marriage; and every child

property, and such property may not be

shall have the right to live, to grow and to

unjustly held in possession by any other party.

develop, and as well as the right to protection
protection from violence and discrimination.
Article 28C: every person shall have the
right to develop himself through the
fulfillment of his/her basic needs, the

The Indonesian Constitution
is the standard to which
national and regional laws
must comply.

right to get education and to benefit from
science and technology, arts and culture,

Thus the Indonesian Constitution stipulates

for the purpose of improving the quality

that people have the rights to live, work

of his/her life and for the welfare of the

and form a family. Children must grow up

human race; and every person shall have

without violence and discrimination. People

the right to improve him/ herself through

should be able to enjoy the benefits of health,

collective struggle for his/her rights to

education, technology and culture. Freedom

develop his/her society, nation and state.

of expression and association are guaranteed,

39 The Indonesian language does not indicate gender in relation to pronouns. In this English version we generally refer to a single person with he-his, unless
it is clear that a woman is meant. To stress the gender neutrality of certain regulations or Articles we sometimes use s/he, and him/herself.

29

This law defines human rights as: ‘...a set

receive information, to develop the self and

of rights that is attached to the essence

social environment. Citizens have the right to

and condition of humanity as creatures of

choose their domicile and should be safe from

the Almighty God and it constitutes His/

torture or humiliating treatment.

(her) gift which should be honoured and

Most basic rights stipulated in the

the law the government and all people for

international human rights treaties

the honour and protection of the dignity

listed above are also stipulated in the

and values of humanity (Article 1 (1)).’

1945 Constitution. In practice however
The most important principle in

to access these rights than heterosexually

relation to women and LGBTIQ groups

married women and people living non-

is Article 3, which states: ‘All persons

normative lives.

have the right to the protection of their
human rights and to the basic human
freedoms, without discrimination.’

rights in Article 28 (J) (2), which states.
Neither in the 1945 Constitution nor in

In exercising his/(her) rights and liberties,

Law No. 39/1999 on Human Rights is

each person has the duty to accept the

there specific mention of the prohibition

limitations determined by law for the sole

of gender-based discrimination including

purposes of guaranteeing the recognition

gender identity, gender expression and

and respect of the rights and liberties of

sexual orientation. The drafting team

other people and of satisfying society’s

of this amendment to the Constitution

just demands based on consideration of

refused to include these categories

morality, religious values, security, and

although they were proposed by Koalisi

public order.

Perempuan Indonesia untuk Keadilan dan
Demokrasi (National Women’s Coalition

This clause is often used to justify anti-

for Justice and Democracy). The drafters

LGBTIQ regional regulations or policies

argued that categories for protection might

invoking the need to protect ‘religious or

continue to increase and the Constitution

moral values’.

could not be continually amended.

Law No. 39 /1999
on Human Rights

The Indonesian Criminal
and Civil Codes
These codes are built on the model of

The human rights guaranteed in the

heterosexual marriage as the only legally

Constitution are also contained in the

recognised form of partnership. Yet

Human Rights Law No. 1999/39. In this law

consensual same sex relations were never

the following are non derogable rights: the

prohibited until the 2008 Anti Pornography

right to live, to not be tortured, freedom

Law was adopted.

of thought and conscience, and of religion.

L a w s

Also problematic is the limitation clause on

N a t i o n a l

heterosexually married men are better able

C r i m i n a l i s a t i o n

highly respected and protected by the state,

C r e e p i n g

including the rights to disseminate and

30

C r e e p i n g

The Indonesian Criminal Code goes back to

no specific provisions protecting women

the Dutch Wetboek van Strafrecht (Criminal

and LGBTIQ people from discrimination.

Code) of 1881, adopted in the Dutch East
Indies in 1915 (based on Koninklijk Besluit
No. 33, Staatsblad No.732) and validated from

C r i m i n a l i s a t i o n

January 1, 1918). This Code was re-adopted
after national independence as Law No.
1/1946. Until now the text has remained
unchanged; however special laws have
been adopted on topics, such as the Anti
Pornography Law, the Domestic Violence
Law, the Anti Trafficking Law and the anti-

N a t i o n a l

abortion provision in the Health Law.

Sexual violence such as
rape, sexual harassment
and trafficking are defined
in terms of culture and
tradition rather than as
violence against women or
LGBTIQ persons.
Neither the Criminal nor Civil Codes
contain clauses on bodily integrity,

L a w s

This Criminal Code reflects the patriarchal

personhood, gender equality, and gender

climate in The Netherlands at the time

and sexual diversity. As such, they are

and was intended to strengthen colonial

not in line with the internationally

power. It has never been adapted to

accepted principles of women’s rights,

the various international human rights

sexual rights and human rights.

regulations, which have since developed
and been ratified by Indonesia. Ironically,

Though revisions to the Criminal Code have

though the colonial period is seen as a dark

been debated in Parliament, the new bill of

period in the history of the archipelago,

the Criminal Code replicates the concepts of

its laws are still largely intact.

morality adopted from the colonial period.
It strengthens the concept of immoral

The Dutch Civil Code of 1848 similarly was the

behaviour as justification to criminalise

basis for the Indonesian Civil Code that came

sexual relations outside of marriage, both

into effect in the Dutch East Indies in 1916. In

by married and unmarried couples (Article

this code men are the heads of the household,

419 and 420). In Article 422, co-habitation

control women’s property and represent

outside of marriage is prohibited. This

women legally (Article 105). Morality is very

effectively brings issues thus far considered

vaguely defined and thus open to various

private into the public realm. In Article

interpretations. Sexual violence such as rape,

420 and 422 of the bill it is stipulated that

sexual harassment and trafficking are defined

the only legal form of sexuality is within a

in terms of culture and tradition rather

heterosexual marriage. This concept is based

than as violence against women or LGBTIQ

on paragraph 1 of the 1974 Marriage Law

persons. Nowhere are women, regardless of

that says that marriage is a complete bond

their sexual orientation, defined as having

between a man and a woman based on God.

autonomy over their own bodies. Marital rape
by definition does not exist in these codes. In

Before laws addressing domestic violence

general it can be said that the Civil Code does

and anti trafficking were enacted, women

not prohibit adult consensual homosexual

could only resort to the Criminal Code

relations. On the other hand it contains

for offenses committed against them by

31

or attempted or frustrated parricide. Only

criminalisation of sex workers, but pimps

physical injuries were considered, such as

are criminalised (Articles 296 and 506).

attempted or frustrated homicide. Other

However, Article 281 on offenses against

forms of violence, e.g., verbal, emotional,

public morality and public decency41 can be

psychological, or economic abuse were not

used to criminalise sex work and LGBTIQ

punishable under the Criminal Code before

people. Furthermore, the way morality is

the Domestic Violence Law of 2004 was

defined and the emphasis on heterosexual

passed. LGBTI children or adults were not

marriage as the only legal form of sexuality

protected from family or partner violence

are used as the basis of discriminatory bylaws

and even today it is still difficult for them

and regional regulations to criminalise same

to claim justice for this kind of violence.

sex partnerships and same sex practices as
or prostitution, all of which are punishable
under different regional regulations.

submitted the new draft of the Criminal
Code to Parliament. This draft has been

Rape was classified as a ‘crime against

revised42 and continuously adapted since

decency’ and limited to penile vaginal

1968 according to the strength of lobbying

penetration. This classification reflected

efforts of religious hard-liner groups who

bias against women, including lesbians,

want to insert Articles of Islamic criminal

bisexual women, transgender men and

law and criminalise LGBTIQ people.

transgender women and created a space
for multiple interpretations of the law

In 2015, Parliament began discussing

where public morality was prioritized

a new Criminal Code Bill. Below we

over safety and justice for victims.

mention the major new elements of
the Criminal Code being debated. Some

In line with the Dutch Criminal Code at

of the proposed changes are positive and

the time, homosexual relations were only

others are of concern.

penalized (Article 292) when one of the
partners was a minor (defined as 15 years).40

In Article 292 on indecent same sex acts with

Presently there is no prohibition of sexual

a child, the age is raised to 18 years to bring

relations of adult persons, heterosexual or

it in line with the International Convention

homosexual, if they are carried out with

on the Rights of The Child and Indonesia’s

the full consent of both persons. There

2014 Law on Child Protection. Meanwhile, the

40 LBH APIK Semarang once defended an adult woman who had sexual relations with a woman a few years younger than she was, and still under age. The
parents of the girl reported the older woman to the police and she was detained and experienced severe physical and psychological violence by police. She
was viewed as violating the law and also social morality. The under-aged girlfriend, a daughter of a medical doctor, was sent to a church to be ‘cleansed’.
41 Punishment is a maximum of two years and eight months or a maximum fine of three thousand rupiah—first for any person who with deliberate intent
publicly offends against decency; secondly, the person who with deliberate intent offends against decency whereby another person is present in spite of
himself.
42 https://id.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kitab_Undang-undang_Hukum_Pidana

L a w s

In 2014 the President of Indonesia

N a t i o n a l

In general it can be said
that the Civil Code does not
prohibit adult consensual
homosexual relations.

adultery, ‘porno action’, sexual harassment

C r i m i n a l i s a t i o n

is also no prohibition of sex work and no
C r e e p i n g

their husbands such as physical injuries

32

C r e e p i n g

national legal marriage age for women is still

autonomy of women and LGBTIQ people. The

16 years, according to the 1974 Marriage Law.

Criminal Code does not address violence in
the private sphere or non-physical violence

The definition of rape is also being broadened

that is just as harmful and injurious.

and is no longer limited to penile vaginal

C r i m i n a l i s a t i o n
N a t i o n a l

(oral sex, anal sex, sex with objects, etc).

Law No. 23/2004
on Domestic Violence

In Article 288, which regulates marital rape

There are various progressive points in this

and statutory rape, a husband who knowingly

law as compared to the Criminal Code. For

has sexual relations with an under-aged wife,

the first time in Indonesian legal regulations

which hurts her or which ends in her death

there is language (Article 3) that is based on

can be punished with a prison sentence of

the following principles: (1) respect for human

four to twelve years. This provision aims

rights; (2) gender justice and equality; (3) the

to prevent early and forced marriage.

principle of non-discrimination and (4) the

penetration but includes other body parts

L a w s

protection of victims.43
Chapter XIV on Crimes Against Decency,
starting from Articles 281-303, regulates

The Domestic Violence Law has gender

various acts from crimes against public

neutral language so that in principle the

indecency to pornography as well as

law can also apply to victims who are men

abortion, gambling and cruelty against

and boys (including those who are gay) and

animals. To be noted, the terminology used

to transgender male to female (waria) and

in the Criminal Code, ‘kesusilaan’ refers

female to male/FTM persons.

to public order, public morality or public
decency while many regional regulations

The law uses a family approach, with a

use ‘maksiat’, which refers to individual

broad definition of ´household´. The law

sin and any behaviours deemed sinful

extends to the marriage bond as well as the

and therefore considered indecent.

bond between an employer and his/her
employee(s) in a household, for instance to

Most criticism of this chapter on Crimes

domestic workers, both women and men.

Against Decency is directed against the

Non-registered marriage relations are also

positioning of gender based crimes in

included in the definition of household.

the public realm. Most violence against

Marital rape is included as an offence and

heterosexual women and LGBTIQ people,

the victims are seen as the major witnesses

particularly youth, does not take place in

so that only one other piece of evidence is

the public realm but in the private realm.

needed to prove domestic violence occurred.

Also the violence is not only physical but
often psychological and tends to be directed

The definition of violence in the Domestic

against the bodily integrity and bodily

Violence Law includes verbal, physical,

43 For a further discussion on the Domestic Violence Law 23/2004 and the 1974 Marriage Law see Nursyahbani Katjasungkana 2013. The Indonesian Family
as a Contested Site of Women’s Rights: Implementation of the Domestic Violence Act in Maznah Muhammad and Saskia E. Wieringa eds± Family Ambiguity
and Domestic Violence in Asia : Concept, Law and Process, Sussex Academic Press. pp 169-192.

33

psychological and economic violence
household or prohibiting the wife to work).
key witnesses when they report the violence

first Indonesian law to contain an Article

they experienced so that only one other piece

criminalizing same sex practices. A regulation

of evidence is needed to prove domestic

on the prohibition of pornography already

violence occurred. Marital rape, though

appears in the chapter on Crimes Against

not mentioned explicitly, can be seen to

Decency (Articles 282 and 283). These were

be included as an offence under ´physical

elaborated in the Anti-Pornography law No.

violence´. However, in reality due to social

44/2008. This bill was passed in Parliament

pressure on women to always ´serve´ their

after lengthy debates and amidst great public

husbands, few women report marital rape.

concern. Article 1 states that ‘pornography
is pictures, sketches, illustrations, photos,
writing, voice, sound, moving pictures,

Domestic Violence Law when they experience

animation, cartoons, conversations,

family violence. Young girls who are forced

movements of the body, or other forms

into marriage or raped by family members

through a variety of communication media

to ‘straighten them out’ are also technically

and/or performances in public, which

protected by this law. The same goes for

contain obscenity or sexual exploitation,

boys who are punished for not following the

which violates the moral norms in society’.

accepted gender codes.

This definition is vague and so broad that it

The definition of violence in
the Domestic Violence Law
includes verbal, physical,
psychological and economic
violence (including not
giving money for the
household or prohibiting
the wife to work).

may lead to widely divergent interpretations,
creating legal uncertainty. The law also
prohibits the ‘creation, dissemination or
broadcasting of pornography containing
deviant sexual intercourse´ the definition
of which incorporates lesbian and gay sex.
Particularly troubling is that ´members of
the community´ are invited to play a role in
enforcing the law. This is an open invitation to
mob violence by rightwing vigilante groups.
For the first time the term ‘deviant sexual

In reality, however, it is almost impossible

relations’ (persenggamaan menyimpang) is

for children to expose such violence. Shame

used in Article 4. This refers to homosexual

and guilt, as well as strong family pressure

relations. Article 4 states: everybody is

stand in their way. Likewise, in principle, the

prohibited to produce, make, reproduce,

Domestic Violence Law applies to violence in

multiply, spread, broadcast, import,

same sex relationships but shame prevents

export, offer, sell, rent or make available

LGBTIQ people from reporting violence they

pornography; sexual violence; masturbation

experience from their same sex partners.

or any nakedness or that gives the impression
of nakedness, genitals; or child pornography.

L a w s

In principle LGBTIQ people can also use the

N a t i o n a l

The 2008 Anti-Pornography Law is the

C r i m i n a l i s a t i o n

Domestic Violence victims are considered

C r e e p i n g

(including not giving money for the

Law No. 44/2008
Against Pornography

34

The elucidation of Article 4 says: ‘what is

Marriage Law No. 1/1974

C r e e p i n g

meant by ‘deviant sexual relations’ includes
sexual relations or other sexual activities with

When this law was enacted in 1974 it was

a corpse, an animal, oral sex, anal sex and

seen as a milestone in the protection of

lesbian and homosexual sex’.

women´s rights for it changed women´s status

C r i m i n a l i s a t i o n
N a t i o n a l

The definition of Pornography
in the Anti-Pornography
law No. 44/2008 is vague
and so broad that it may
lead to widely divergent
interpretations, creating
legal uncertainty.

as regulated in the Civil Code and provided
a new interpretation of Muslim teachings.
Marriage is only considered legally valid
when it is registered (Article 2). This was
strengthened in the Compilation of Islamic
Law (CIL) of 1981 (Article 6), which added
that the marriage book is the only legally
acceptable proof of marriage. A shortcoming
of the law is that it does not specifically
allow marriage between partners of different

L a w s

In 2009 the Constitutional Court ruled on

religions. In Article 2(1) it is stipulated that

a request for judicial review filed by many

people can marry according to their own

women’s and human rights organisations

religion. In Islam women are prohibited from

(including LBH APIK) as well as religious

marrying a partner with a different religion,

and community-based groups, supported

while Muslim men are allowed to do so.

by a great many activists (including LGBTIQ
activists) and artists. It was argued that

Another shortcoming of the Marriage Law is

the Anti Pornography Law did not honour

that same sex marriage is not allowed. This

the wide diversity of Indonesia‘s cultural,

is reiterated in Law No. 23/2006 on Civil

religious and social customs, including dance

Administration, which states that same sex

and theatre, poetry and customs such as

partnership is not allowed, nor is transgender

men and women bathing together, and that it

status recognised.

violated the freedom of expression and other
constitutional rights, such as the right to earn

A marriage is also seen as the means for

a living (as artists, dancers, etc.). Among the

procreation. Article 10 of the Human Rights

arguments used in favour of the law was that

Law No. 39/1999 states: “every person has

youth committed indecent acts (including

the right to form a family and procreate via a

heterosexual rape and sodomy) after

legally valid marriage.”

watching videos with content considered
pornographic.
Ultimately the Court rejected the request
for judicial review of the law. This law is an
example of the manipulation and reinvention
of culture in the name of narrowly defined
Muslim ethics, creating opportunities for
harassing heterosexual women and nonheteronormative persons.

35

Health Law No. 36/2009
The 2009 Health Law is a major step forward
from its predecessor, Health Law No. 23/1992,
in devoting a full chapter to reproductive
Code in that abortion is still prohibited,
except when there is a medical indication

Permission from the religious court is

that the health of the mother or the child is

always required since in Islamic teachings

endangered or in the case of rape (Article 75).

an adopted child is not recognized. In Article

This change forms an important improvement

13 of the Regulation several conditions

after the MUI issued its fatwa No. 4/2005

are spelled out that prospective parents

on abortion requiring legal proof that rape

have to fulfill. They need to be healthy and

actually occurred to allow the termination of

economically able to support a child and they

a pregnancy.

years. Adoption is expressly prohibited to

There are other discriminatory clauses:

same sex couples.

A pregnant woman who needs an
abortion on medical grounds requires
the permission of her husband, and the

Compilation of Islamic
Law (CIL)

pregnancy cannot be further than six

For Muslims, issues related to marriage and

abortion Article 75 (2 and 3), when the

inheritance are dealt with in the religious

performance of abortion is of a low quality,

courts. Thus for the Muslim population the

not safe, not responsible and contradicts

Marriage Law No. 1/1974 and the Compilation

religious norms and legal stipulations’.

weeks. Article 77 states: ‘the government is
obliged to protect women and to prevent

of Islamic Law both apply. Non-Muslims are
subjected to general courts. The CIL also

In line with Article 28B (1) of the 1945

regulates inheritance. Article 176 states: ‘if

Constitution, which states that ‘every

there is only one daughter she gets half of

person has the right to form a family and to

the inheritance, when there are two or more

produce offspring via a legal marriage’, the

daughters together they get two-third of the

Health Law No. 36/2009 explicitly states

inheritance. When there are both daughters

that a healthy, reproductive and sexual life

and sons the share of the son is twice that of

may only be enjoyed with a ‘lawful partner’

the daughter. It is also possible to come to a

and without ‘violating religious values’.

different agreement on the inheritance (for

Heteronormativity is thus enshrined in this

instance equal shares), provided all parties

law and religion is introduced in matters

agree’ (Article 183). There are no provisions in

of health and reproduction. Additionally,

the CIL to prevent disinheritance of LGBTIQ

according to this law there are no sexual

daughters and sons.

health or reproductive health services
available to couples, including couples with
children, if they are not officially married.

L a w s

need to be legally married for minimum five

N a t i o n a l

Single parent adoption is not allowed.

C r i m i n a l i s a t i o n

health. However it follows the Criminal

C r e e p i n g

Government Regulation
on Adoption (No.
54/2007), and the Later
Law on Child Protection
No. 35/2014

36

C r e e p i n g
C r i m i n a l i s a t i o n

LGBTIQ people are also affected by the

family planning are intended for couples who

discriminatory provisions of the Health Law

are legally married. It means that marriage

as most of them are not in legally recognized

is the only way to get legal offspring (Article

heterosexual marriages. Further, sexual

42 of 1974 Marriage Law). These provisions

health services are limited to heterosexual

can be and are used as tools for anti-LGBTIQ

and not same sex activities, thus denying

initiatives and campaigns.

access to LGBTIQ adults, LGBTIQ youth

N a t i o n a l
L a w s

as well as unmarried heterosexual people.

A 2014 published policy document (PP

Lesbians and bisexual women who are raped

61/2014), defined healthy sexual relations

and experience forced pregnancies or who

as: a) free from sexual infections, b) free

are forced into heterosexual marriages

from dysfunction and disturbance of sexual

that involve marital rape resulting in forced

orientation …and e) in line with ethics and

pregnancies are also negatively impacted

morality (Article 26-2b). The range of this

because of the heteronormative elements

government regulation on reproductive

of the Health Law including the restrictive

health is limited to the health of the mother,

provisions on abortion. Further, in the

emergency medical indications and rape, in

absence of LBT sensitive healthcare or sexual

relation to exceptions on the prohibition of

health services, LBT teenagers as well as

abortion (Article 2).

adults may not even have the opportunity to
consult healthcare professionals including

These stipulations ignore the fact that there

counselors about their options to deal

may be health risks involved in unwanted

with sexual health concerns, unwanted

pregnancies of women who are not legally

pregnancies, or sexual violence.

married. These risks may lead to a range of

Sexual health services are
limited to heterosexual
and not same sex activities,
thus denying access to
LGBTIQ adults, LGBTIQ
youth as well as unmarried
heterosexual people.

other risks, such as stigma on the mothers
and also on the children of such pregnancies.
It may even lead to the death of mother
and/or child, because of the absence of
medical services for them. The high number
of unsafe abortions of girls contributes
to the high level of maternal mortality
in Indonesia (SDKI 2012, 359/100.000).
These statistics do not disaggregate for
lesbians, bisexual and transgender FTM

According to Articles 72 and 78 of the Health

youth so we do not know how many girls

Law, access to sexual and reproductive

who are lesbian, bisexual, transgender and

services is only provided to legal couples

intersex have had unsafe abortions and/

and couples of ‘fertile age’. In practice this

or lost their lives as a result of them.

means that only legally married couples can
access reproductive health services or family

The restriction on the provision of access to

planning clinics. This issue is strengthened

sexual and reproductive health services only

in the Law on Population Growth and Family

to legally married couples implies that both

Building No. 52/2009, which states that

Article 28 of the Constitution and the two

reproductive rights and the decisions on

laws analysed in this section discriminate