Human Dignity Trust News Contact Us Search Twitter Facebook Instagram Human Dignity Trust Donate Menu Home LGBT people & the law Map of Jurisdictions that Criminalise LGBT People A History of LGBT Criminalisation Status of Commonwealth Sexual Offence Laws What We Do Where We Work Strategic litigation Changing Laws, Changing Lives Who We Are Our Team Our Board Our Patrons Legal Panel Bar Panel Commonwealth Group of Experts Our Funders Jobs & Consultancies Support Us Donate Leave a Legacy of Love Corporate Partnerships Trusts and Foundations Resources Videos Search for something Submit search query Search Donate Home LGBT people & the law Expand dropdown Map of Jurisdictions that Criminalise LGBT People A History of LGBT Criminalisation Status of Commonwealth Sexual Offence Laws What We Do Expand dropdown Where We Work Strategic litigation Expand dropdown Belize: A constitutional challenge to the laws criminalising same-sex activity Eastern Caribbean: Constitutional challenges to multiple laws criminalising same-sex activity Sri Lanka: Case before UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) Namibia: Case before the High Court Mauritius: Case before Supreme Court European Union: A case before the Court of Justice Jamaica: Case Decided by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights Northern Cyprus: Petition before the European Court of Human Rights Singapore: Two separate cases before the Court of Appeal Changing Laws, Changing Lives Expand dropdown Seychelles Penal Code (Amendment) Act 2024 Who We Are Expand dropdown Our Team Our Board Our Patrons Legal Panel Bar Panel Commonwealth Group of Experts Our Funders Jobs & Consultancies Support Us Expand dropdown Donate Leave a Legacy of Love Corporate Partnerships Trusts and Foundations Resources Expand dropdown Videos News Contact Us Twitter Facebook Instagram We use the law to defend the human rights of LGBT+ people globally Read about us The Issue 0 countries have jurisdictions which criminalise private, same-sex, consensual sexual activity. All of them criminalise men and 42 criminalise women. 0 jurisdictions can or do impose the death penalty for same-sex intimacy. 0 Commonwealth jurisdictions criminalise private, same-sex, consensual sexual activity. Find Out More About The Issue Watch our new impact film Making change for LGBT+ people happen, one legal victory at a time Our new film tells the story of the challenges we’ve overcome and the victories we’ve achieved. It reflects on how far we’ve come over the past 12 years and why our journey is far from over. 5 minutes LGBT+ people & the law There are 66 jurisdictions around the world that still criminalise private, same-sex, consensual sexual activity. Almost half of these are Commonwealth countries. Explore Country information 29 out of 56 Commonwealth jurisdictions criminalise consensual same-sex intimacy, with sentences ranging from two years in prison to the death penalty. 9 jurisdictions worldwide maintain discriminatory age of consent laws between opposite-sex and same-sex acts. In at least 26 countries, authorities use public order, vagrancy and misdemeanour offences to harass, arrest and prosecute transgender people. Blackmail, extortion, and physical and sexual violence is commonplace. Read The Facts Why our work matters Sri Lanka Rosanna Flamer-Caldera, Equal Ground 'In the past few years we’ve worked with the Human Dignity Trust which has been an amazing experience for me personally, as well as a huge boost to our LGBT+ activism in Sri Lanka. They’ve gone out of their way, and their expertise has been invaluable' Kenya Njeri Gateru, National Gay and Lesbian Human Rights Commission 'Going to court meant finally being able to present our truths to a state body, to say this is who we are, but that doesn’t mean that you get to kill us, that because we love differently it doesn’t mean that you get to abuse us on a daily basis, or that lesbian women should get raped' Belize Caleb Orozco, United Belize Advocacy Movement 'The Human Dignity Trust has worked with us to push the boundaries of legal argument, and has allowed us to expand our expectations beyond belief and stretch the possibility of advancing the socio-economic and civil rights of LGBT+ people. To that end, the Trust has enabled our expectations and given life to what we desire most as people seeking a better quality of life' Read more news on LGBT+ activism around the world Our Impact 0 The number of trial and appeal victories secured with our support to date. 0 The number of cases and appeals we have helped file in 17 countries so far. £29.3m The value of pro bono technical legal assistance accessed by the Trust in support of our work with LGBT+ activists since 2011. Read More About Our Impact Latest Updates View All News Niger criminalises same-sex intimacy for the first time in its history Neighbouring francophone countries under military rule, Burkina Faso and Mali, also recently criminalised homosexuality How supportive is the 2026 World Cup to LGBT+ people worldwide? The Human Dignity Trust reports that nearly a quarter of participating countries maintain laws criminalising consensual same-sex intimacy One in three countries still criminalises same-sex intimacy – but justice is possible, says Human Dignity Trust HDT launches #DoubleYourPride campaign Support our work 66 countries criminalise LGBT+ people. Help us bring that number down. Donate Key Publications Gifts in Wills Guide We’ve created a free Gifts in Wills guide to help you understand how leaving a gift, whether in a new Will or an existing one, can support our vital work for decades to come. Randall Theodule et al v The Attorney General of Saint Lucia Case Digest This Case Digest summarises the July 2025 High Court of Saint Lucia's decision to strike down a discriminatory, colonial-era, criminal law that targeted LGBT people. View All Publications Sign up to receive updates Join our newsletter to receive regular updates about decriminalisation efforts around the world, including breaking news on key legal cases, hot off the press reports, invitations to events and messages from our Chief Executive. SIGN UP We use the law to defend the human rights of LGBT people globally. Twitter Facebook Instagram Human Dignity Trust, 4th Floor West - Quality House 5-9 Quality Court, Chancery Lane, London WC2A 1HP, United Kingdom Copyright © 2026 . All Rights Reserved. Registered charity in England and Wales (No. 1158093) Charity web design by Fat Beehive Sitemap Accessibility Privacy Notice & Cookies Policy Home LGBT people & the law What We Do Who We Are Support Us Resources Donate Make a one time donation X/Twitter This field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged. Single Donation This form will create a one time donation of Title - select - Mr Mrs Miss Ms Mx Dr Rev Name * First Last Address Line 1 * Address Line 2 Town / City * Postcode * Country Email * Email Confirm Email Phone Gift Aid opt-in I am a UK taxpayer. Please enable Gift Aid on my donation Consent * I agree to the privacy policy . I have read and understood the Human Dignity Trust's policy on how my information is used (link opens in a new tab/window) Keep in touch Yes, I would like to receive news from the Human Dignity Trust about how my donation is making a difference. Submit CLOSE Make a monthly donation by subscription Monthly Donation This form will create a monthly subscription of Title - select - Mr Mrs Miss Ms Mx Dr Rev Name * First Last Address Line 1 * Address Line 2 Town / City * Postcode * Country Email * Email Confirm Email Phone Gift Aid opt-in I am a UK taxpayer. Please enable Gift Aid on my donation Consent * I agree to the privacy policy . I have read and understood the Human Dignity Trust's policy on how my information is used (link opens in a new tab/window) Keep in touch Yes, I would like to receive news from the Human Dignity Trust about how my donation is making a difference. Submit CLOSE Make a one time donation LinkedIn This field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged. Single Donation This form will create a one-off donation of Title - select - Mr Mrs Miss Ms Mx Dr Rev Name * First Last Address Line 1 * Address Line 2 Town / City * Postcode * Country Email * Enter Email Confirm Email Phone Gift Aid opt-in I am a UK taxpayer. Please enable Gift Aid on my donation Consent * I agree to the privacy policy . I have read and understood the Human Dignity Trust's policy on how my information is used (link opens in a new tab/window) Keep in touch I would like to receive news from the Human Dignity Trust about how my donation is making a difference. Submit CLOSE Make a monthly donation by subscription Email This field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged. Monthly Donation This form will create a monthly subscription of Title - select - Mr Mrs Miss Ms Mx Dr Rev Name * First Last Address Line 1 * Address Line 2 Town / City * Postcode * Country Email * Email Confirm Email Phone Gift Aid opt-in I am a UK taxpayer. Please enable Gift Aid on my donation Consent * I agree to the privacy policy . I have read and understood the Human Dignity Trust's policy on how my information is used (link opens in a new tab/window) Keep in touch Yes, I would like to receive news from the Human Dignity Trust about how my donation is making a difference. Submit CLOSE