Jump to content
Main menu
Main menu
move to sidebar
hide
Navigation
Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us
Contribute
Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages
Search
Search
Appearance
Donate
Create account
Log in
Personal tools
Donate
Create account
Log in
Contents
move to sidebar
hide
(Top)
1
Background
2
March
3
Aftermath
4
See also
5
References
Toggle the table of contents
Białystok Equality March
3 languages
Čeština Español Polski
Edit links
Article
Talk
English
Read
Edit
View history
Tools
Tools
move to sidebar
hide
Actions
Read
Edit
View history
General
What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Switch to legacy parser
Print/export
Download as PDF Printable version
In other projects
Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item
Appearance
move to sidebar
hide
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
(Redirected from Białystok equality march )
Event in Poland
Poland against Violence, Solidarity with Białystok demonstration
The first Bialystok equality march took place on 20 July 2019 in Białystok . Approximately a thousand pride marchers were opposed by thousands of members of far-right groups, ultra football fans , and others who violently attacked the marchers. Following the attack, solidarity events were held in Poland.
Background [ edit ]
Map of Poland, LGBT-free zones declared (as of July 2019) on a Voivodeship or Powiat level marked in red.
LGBT-free zone stickers distributed by the Gazeta Polska newspaper
Białystok is located in Podlaskie Voivodeship which is regarded as the bible belt of Poland and is a stronghold of the party Law and Justice (PiS). [ 1 ] The surrounding Białystok County had been declared an LGBT-free zone in 2019, [ 2 ] as have other regions in Poland. [ 3 ] [ 4 ] However, the mayor of Białystok Tadeusz Truskolaski is a political independent with more tolerant views. [ 1 ]
In February 2019 Warsaw Mayor signed a declaration supporting LGBTQ rights and pledging to integrate sexual education in schools following World Health Organization guidelines. [ 3 ] The Warsaw declaration enraged conservatives and was a rallying cry in conservative politics and media. [ 3 ] While in the run-up to the 2015 Polish parliamentary election PiS engaged in anti-Muslim rhetoric, in the months prior to 2019 Polish parliamentary election PiS focused on LGBT right. PiS leader Jarosław Kaczyński saying LGBT "ideology" was imported to Poland from abroad, a threat to the Polish identity and nation. [ 5 ]
Many Catholic Church in Poland figures have spoken against LGBT rights in Poland. [ 4 ] In response to speeches opposed to the movement for acceptance and civil rights for gender and sexual minorities, made by the Church and PiS, some 24 pride marches were scheduled for 2019 in Poland. [ 6 ]
On 7 July 2019, Archbishop Tadeusz Wojda issued a proclamation to be read in all churches in Białystok and the entire Podlaskie Voivodeship . [ 2 ] He evoked the memory of Poland's struggle against Communism with the Latin phrase non possumus (roughly, "we can not allow"), [ 7 ] which Polish Cardinal Stefan Wyszyński used in an historic protest that led to his arrest in 1953. [ 8 ] He wrote that pride marches were "blasphemy against God", [ 2 ] and described the march as set up "by a foreign initiative in Podlaskie land and community, an area which is deeply rooted in Christianity and concerned about the good of its own society, especially children". [ 9 ] Unlike right-wing and centrist mayors elsewhere in Poland, who had attempted to ban pride marches, Białystok's mayor allowed the march to take place in the face of widespread criticism from PiS officials. [ 1 ]
According to Rafał Pankowski of "Never Again" Association , the Białystok region is strong associated with the far-right: "Many of the acts of xenophobic aggression have been committed in Podlaskie compared to other regions in Poland". [ 6 ]
According to the police, 32 demonstrations were registered for the day of the march mostly in opposition to it. [ 6 ] counter-demonstrations included a prayer vigil at Cathedral Basilica of the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary, Białystok and an adjoining picnic at Branicki Palace, Białystok that was organized by Podlaskie marshal Artur Kosicki that included a display by an army regiment, folk musicians, and inflatable castles. [ 6 ]
Prior to the march, leaflets were distributed in the city stating it would be "contaminated with LGBT bacteria". [ 6 ] The Gazeta Polska newspaper announced plans to distribute LGBT-free zone stickers along with the newspaper. [ 10 ] [ 3 ]
March [ edit ]
According to Jacek Dehnel , he was supposed to make a speech at the opening of the march at a square on Skłodowska Street, however as marchers were faced with violence even prior to the official start of the march and the riot atmosphere prevented this. [ 5 ]
Approximately 800 [ 11 ] to 1,000 [ 6 ] pride marchers were opposed by thousands of members of far-right groups, ultra football fans , and others who threw rocks, bottles, and firecrackers at the marchers. [ 6 ] Police estimated some 4,000 counter protesters were involved. [ 6 ] Counter-protesters shouted "Bialystok free of perverts" and "God, honor and fatherland", and objects were hurled at marchers from housing blocks along the route. [ 6 ] The marchers shouted "Poland free of fascists" as they marched some 3 kilometers in the city center. [ 6 ]
At around 5 in the evening the march ended, following the dispersal of far-right protesters by police who used pepper spray and stun grenades. [ 6 ] To avoid being attacked as they left the march, some marchers hid LGBT flags and removed their makeup, in an effort to avoid standing out. [ 6 ] [ 5 ]
More than 30 [ 3 ] people were arrested for attacking police or the pride marchers. [ 11 ]
Dozens of marchers were injured. [ 2 ] Amnesty International criticized the police response, saying they had failed to protect marchers and "failed to respond to instances of violence". [ 12 ]
Aftermath [ edit ]
Marchers in 2019 Christopher Street Day 2019 march holding up Solidarity signs with Poland, following Białystok attack
According to the New York Times , similar to the manner in which the Unite the Right rally in Charlottesville shocked Americans, the violence in Białystok raised public concern among some in Poland over opposition to the homosexual agenda and gender ideology. [ 2 ] While the Polish government has condemned the violence at the march, it has also hinted that LGBTQ activists were attempting a provocation. [ 3 ] In late July the Ministry of Interior said they had identified 104 people who broke the law in the march, and carried out enforcement action towards 77. [ 1 ]
Michael Roth , the German Minister of State for Europe , condemned the attack and stated that he brings up gay rights in every discussion with his Polish counterparts. [ 13 ]
Thousands took to the streets in Warsaw to protest the violence in Białystok. [ 2 ] A demonstration for tolerance was held in Gdańsk [ 14 ] on 23 July 2019, with the slogan "zone free of zones" ( Polish : Strefa wolna od stref ). [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] In Szczecin a demonstration under the slogan of "hate-free zone" ( Polish : Strefa wolna od nienawiści ) took place, [ 17 ] [ 18 ] and in Łódź left-wing politicians handed out "hate-free zone" stickers. [ 17 ] [ 19 ] A week after the events, left-wing parties held a protest in Białystok against the violence at the march. [ 4 ] In the July 2019 Berlin Pride , marchers organized by Die Linke carried signs in solidarity with Białystok . One marcher carried a banner of the Rainbow Madonna , in solidarity with Elżbieta Podleśna who was arrested in May 2019 for putting up signs of the Madonna . [ 13 ] [ 20 ]
Archbishop Tadeusz Wojda, two days after the event, condemned the violence in a brief statement as incompatible with Christianity but also urged believes to pray for "the family and its internal purity". [ 5 ]
The Polish Sieci magazine ran a cover story titled "A massive attack on Poland is approaching" in which they blamed the attack on the liberal opposition, saying they were trying to discredit the government. [ 21 ]
LGBT campaigners stated that PiS and the Church created a radicalised atmosphere, saying the government incited a " pogrom mood" towards gays. [ 22 ]
Responding to the attacks on the Polish LGBT community, the global All Out LGBT+-rights group launched a campaign in Poland. All Out's Director of Programs Mathias Wasik stated: "More recently, we’ve been particularly worried about the escalation of attacks on LGBT+ people in Poland. Right-wing politicians and representatives of the Catholic church have been using the issue for their own political agenda. And their divisive words are being followed up by hateful actions, as we’ve seen during the attacks on the pride march in Białystok". [ 23 ]
See also [ edit ]
LGBTQ portal Poland portal
LGBT rights in Poland
References [ edit ]
1 2 3 4 A city's first pride march was meant to be a day of joy. The far right turned it into chaos , CNN, Tara John, 28 July 2019
1 2 3 4 5 6 Anti-Gay Brutality in a Polish Town Blamed on Poisonous Propaganda , New York Times, 27 July 2019
1 2 3 4 5 6 "Polish ruling party whips up LGBTQ hatred ahead of elections amid 'gay-free' zones and Pride march attacks" . Telegraph . 9 August 2019.
1 2 3 Protesters in Poland condemn attack on LGBT march , Timothy Jones, Deutsche Welle , 28 July 2019
1 2 3 4 The struggle for LGBT equality: Pride meets prejudice in Poland , Guardian, Jacek Dehnel , 28 July 2019
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Polish city holds first LGBTQ pride parade despite far-right violence , CNN, 21 July 2019
↑ "Odezwa Abp. Tadeusza Wojdy ws. marszu LGBT w Białymstoku" [ Appeal from Archbishop Tadeusz Wojda on the LGBT march in Bialystok ] . Archdiocese of Białystok (in Polish). 7 July 2019 . Retrieved 23 August 2019 .
↑ Kunicki, Mikołaj Stanisław (2012). Between the Brown and the Red: Nationalism, Catholicism, and Communism in Twentieth-Century Poland . Ohio University Press. p.   99. ISBN   9780821444207 . Retrieved 23 August 2019 .
↑ The Rainbow on Fire , Visegrad Insight, Gabriela Rogowska 8 August 2019
↑ "Hooligans bewerfen Gay-Pride-Demonstranten mit Steinen" [ Hooligans throw stones at gay pride protesters ] . Die Zeit (in German). 21 July 2019.
1 2 More Than 20 People Detained for Attack on LGBT Parade in Poland , Bloomberg, 21 July 2019
↑ Archbishop claims a ‘rainbow plague’ is afflicting Poland , Pink News, 2 August 2019
1 2 Berlin in solidarity with Białystok. LGBT parade in Berlin , Deutsche Welle , Jacek Lepiarz, 28 July 2019
↑ Right-wing Polish magazine slammed for anti-LGBT stickers Archived 2019-08-21 at the Wayback Machine , Associated press (reprint by San Francisco Chronicle), 24 July 2019
↑ "Everyone is equal, everyone is different". A protest against hatred took place in Gdansk , Maciej Dzwonnik, Gazeta Wyborcza (Trojmiasto), 23 July 2019
↑ " "Strefa wolna od stref" - manifestacja przeciwko nienawiści, w geście solidarności z LGBT w Gdańsku (23.07)" [ Zone free of zones" - a manifestation against hatred, in a gesture of solidarity with LGBT in Gdansk (23.07) ] . Dziennik Baltycki (in Polish). 23 July 2019.
1 2 3 Solidarity with Bialystok. Marches, rebounds and # TęczowaŚroda , Polityka , 23 July 2019
↑ Szczecin - a zone free from hatred! In response to this fury, this gutter , Gazeta Wyborcza 26 July 2019
↑ Łódź together with Białystok. "Hate Free Zone" stickers were distributed, there will be a picket , Gazeta Wyborcza, 23 July 2019
↑ Equality parade in Berlin. Germany in solidarity with Bialystok , Gazeta Wyborcza , 28 July 2019
↑ Polish state firms pouring ad cash into media that attack gay rights, research data shows , Reuters, 5 August 2019, Anna Koper
↑ Polish government inciting ‘pogrom mood’, say LGBT activists , Derek Scally, The Irish Times , 22 July 2019
↑ All Out: The campaign against homophobia in Poland , Emerging Europe, 24 August 2019, Portia kentish
v t e Pride parades and festivals
Black gay pride
Christopher Street Day
Critical pride
Dyke March
Equality marches
EuroPride
List of LGBTQ events
Night pride
Trans march
WorldPride
Africa South Africa
Cape Town
Johannesburg
Soweto
Knysna
Americas
Asunción
Bogotá
El Salvador
Guatemala City
Lima
Nicaragua
Nuuk
Panama
San José
San Pedro Sula
Santo Domingo
Uruguay
Argentina
Buenos Aires
Córdoba
Rosario
Bolivia
National
La Paz
Santa Cruz de la Sierra
Brazil
Cuiabá
Curitiba
Praia Grande
Rio de Janeiro
São Paulo
Canada
Calgary
Edmonton
Guelph
Halifax
Montreal
Ottawa
Regina
Saskatoon
Simcoe
Steinbach
Sudbury
Thunder Bay
Toronto
Vancouver
Waterloo
Windsor-Essex
Winnipeg
Ecuador
Cuenca
Guayaquil
Quito
Trans Pride
Mexico
Guadalajara
Mexico City
Puerto Vallarta
United States
Atlanta
Black
Augusta
Boquerón
Boston
Charleston
Chicago
Cincinnati
Columbus
Dallas
Black
Denver
Detroit
Eugene
Harrisburg
Hermosa Beach
Houston
Indianapolis
Jacksonville
Lansing
Las Vegas
Long Beach
Los Angeles
Black
Downtown
Milwaukee
Minneapolis
Montana
Nashville
New Orleans
New York
Northampton, MA
Olympia
Phoenix
Providence
Puerto Rico
Reno
Salt Lake City
San Diego
San Francisco
San Jose
Seattle
St. Louis
Tri-Cities, TN
Tucson
Washington, DC
Black
Asia
Beirut
Colombo
Kuala Lumpur
Iran
Singapore
Taiwan
Tbilisi
Yangon
China
Hong Kong
Shanghai
India
Bengaluru
Bhopal
Bhubaneswar
Chandigarh
Chennai
Coimbatore
Dehradun
Delhi
Goa
Gujarat
Gurgaon
Guwahati
Hyderabad
Jaipur
Jamshedpur
Kolkata
Lucknow
Mumbai
Nagpur
Patna
Pune
Israel
Jerusalem
Tel Aviv
Haifa
Eilat
Japan
Tokyo
Sapporo
Nepal
National
Gai Jatra
Philippines
Manila
Quezon City
South Korea
Seoul
Daegu
Turkey
Ankara
Istanbul
İzmir
Europe
Amsterdam
Athens
Baltics
Brussels
Budapest
Eindhoven
Helsinki
Kyiv
Luxembourg
Ljubljana
Moscow
Minsk
Podgorica
Oslo
Reykjavik
Sápmi
Sarajevo
Sofia
Tbilisi
Vienna
Croatia
Zagreb
Split
Osijek
Denmark
Copenhagen
Aarhus
France
Paris
Toulouse
Germany
Berlin
Kreuzberg
2026 attack
Cologne
Hamburg
Ireland
Dublin
Limerick
Italy
Milan
Varese
Poland
Białystok
Kraków
Warsaw
Gdańsk
Szczecin
Portugal
Lisbon
Porto
Romania
Bucharest
Timișoara
Serbia
Belgrade
Novi Sad
Spain
Madrid
Valencia
Sweden
Stockholm
Gothenburg
United Kingdom
Aberdeen
Birmingham
Bournemouth
Brighton
Bristol
Canterbury
Cardiff
Doncaster
Dundee
Durham
Edinburgh
Exeter
Glasgow
Hull
Leeds
Leicester
Liverpool
London
Manchester
Norwich
Nottingham
Plymouth
Reading
Swansea
Worthing
York
Oceania Australia
Adelaide
Brisbane
Cairns
Daylesford
Melbourne
Sydney
New Zealand
Auckland ( Hero Parade )
Christchurch
Wellington
v t e LGBTQ topics in Poland History
Operation Hyacinth
Warsaw Gay Movement (1987–1988)
Łódź Gay Murderer (1988–1993)
Lambda Groups Association (1989–1997)
Tęczowy Laur   [ pl ] (1998–2001)
Le Madame (2003–2006)
Rainbow Night (2020)
Organizations
Lambda Warszawa (1997–)
Campaign Against Homophobia (2001–)
Let Them See Us
Equality Foundation   [ pl ] (2005–)
Trans-Fuzja (2008–)
Miłość Nie Wyklucza (2009–)
Stop Bullshit (2019–2021)
Culture and art
Onu (pronoun)
queer.pl
Rainbow Friday
Rainbow Madonna
Tęcza
Films
Tongariro Releasing   [ pl ]
Floating Skyscrapers
In the Name Of
Article 18
Fanfic
Magazines
Inaczej
InterAlia   [ pl ]
Replika
Books
The Rainbow Primer   [ pl ]
Fanfik   [ pl ]
Swimming in the Dark
TV
Homofonia
Inwazja
Equality marches
Białystok
Gdańsk
Kraków
Poznań   [ pl ]
Szczecin
Toruń   [ pl ]
Warsaw
Wrocław
Rights and policy
Politicians
" LGBT ideology "
LGBT-free zones
Recognition of same-sex unions
Bączkowski v Poland
Offending religious feelings
Category
Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Białystok_Equality_March&oldid=1344305002 "
Categories : Equality marches in Poland 2019 in LGBTQ history Violence against LGBTQ people in Europe Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles containing Polish-language text Webarchive template wayback links
This page was last edited on 19 March 2026, at 16:37  (UTC) .
Page was rendered with Parsoid .
Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. , a non-profit organization.
Privacy policy
About Wikipedia
Disclaimers
Contact Wikipedia
Legal & safety contacts
Code of Conduct
Developers
Statistics
Cookie statement
Mobile view
Search
Search
Toggle the table of contents
Białystok Equality March
3 languages
Add topic