Sweden to stop calling transgender people 'mentally ill' Advertisement Swedish News Latest news 2026 Swedish election Politics Immigration Cost of living Travel news Economy Stockholm Malmö Gothenburg Discover Sweden 2026 election Podcast Practical help Living in Sweden Work permits Moving to Sweden Residency permits Study in Sweden Visas Citizenship Living Costs Family Taxes Pensions Reader questions Language Swedish courses Learning Swedish Swedish Word of the Day Homes Property Renting Find Rentals Jobs Games Topics Swedish News Latest news 2026 Swedish election Politics Immigration Cost of living Travel news Economy Stockholm Malmö Gothenburg Discover Sweden 2026 election Podcast Practical help Living in Sweden Work permits Moving to Sweden Residency permits Study in Sweden Visas Citizenship Living Costs Family Taxes Pensions Reader questions Language Swedish courses Learning Swedish Swedish Word of the Day Homes Property Renting Find Rentals Jobs Games Choose edition sweden All Editions Austria Denmark France Germany Italy Norway Spain Sweden Switzerland Membership Become a member Newsletters Help Centre Gift Vouchers Educational Access Corporate Access The Local About Us Contact Us News Archive Search articles All topics Advertise with us Post a job ad Get The Local App The Local Europe AB Västmannagatan 43 113 25 Stockholm Sweden transgender Sweden to stop calling transgender people 'mentally ill' TT/The Local - news@thelocal.se Published: 28 Jan, 2017 CET. Share Add a comment An archive picture of Swedes protesting against classifying transgender people as mentally ill. Photo: Leif R Jansson/TT Add The Local as a preferred source Transgender people will no longer be classified as “mentally ill” in Sweden, the country’s main national health authority has announced, in a decision widely criticised as overdue. Sweden’s National Board of Health and Welfare, or Socialstyrelsen, announced late on Friday that it would no longer automatically apply the diagnosis “gender dysphoria” to transgender patients. “…more than anything, this change has an important symbolic value," Kristina Bränd Persson, the organisation’s head, said in a press release . “This is a completely reasonable change. Many divisions and categories are obsolete. For us, the decision is uncontroversial. We tend to follow the changes the WHO makes.” The decision was widely ridiculed on Twitter. "At fucking bloody last!" tweeted Leo Ringqvist. "We are not ill, most of all mentally." Fucking jävla äntligen! Vi är inte sjuka, framför allt inte psykiskt. - Socialstyrelsen ändrar sig om transpersoner. https://t.co/DTU260o1HY — Leo Ringqvist (@LeoR1010) January 28, 2017 "Wake me! Is it 2017 or 1817," complained Ewa-Maria Åström. Socialstyrelsen har beslutat att transexualitet inte längre är att betraktas som sjukdom. Väck mig ⏰. Är det 2017 eller 1817?? #rfsl — Ewa-Marie Åström (@t_eas) January 27, 2017 The move follows a decision made by the World Health Organisation in October to remove the transsexualism classification from the chapter on mental illness in its diagnostic guide. "This is welcome but no surprise," said Frida Sandegård, chairperson of RFSL, which lobbies for the rights of gay, bisexual and transgender people. Transgender people have complained of receiving unwelcome questions and stigmatising treatment when dealing with health professionals in Sweden. The agency said the change would not take place immediately, as it would first have to incorporate the decision into its own national version of ICD-10, the latest disease classification manual issued by the WHO. The work is expected to be completed this year. Become a member or log in to continue reading More #transgender #socialstyrelsen #rfsl Comments Join the conversation in our comments section below. Share your own views and experience and if you have a question or suggestion for our journalists then email us at news@thelocal.se . Please keep comments civil, constructive and on topic – and make sure to read our terms of use before getting involved. Please log in here to leave a comment. See Also Advertisement The Local Europe AB Västmannagatan 43 113 25 Stockholm Sweden The Local About us Contact us News Archive Search articles Find jobs in Sweden Find a rental in Sweden Post a job ad Advertise with us Membership Login Become a member Newsletters Help Centre Gift Vouchers Educational access Corporate access Popular Topics Latest News Malmö Gothenburg Politics Working in Sweden Learning Swedish All topics Get daily news straight in your inbox Sign up By signing up you agree to our Terms of Use and Privacy Policy. We will use your email address to send you newsletters as well as information and offers related to your account. 2026 The Local, All Rights Reserved. Manage Cookies Privacy Policy Terms & Conditions