Attacks on trans women in Indonesia did not suddenly appear. Here's what's behind them - ABC News Skip to main content Skip to news navigation, settings and search Explore the ABC More from ABC Close menu ABC ABC News ABC iview ABC listen Kids & Students Indigenous Information & Services Editorial Policies Read our editorial guiding principles Follow the ABC news iview listen Loading ABC News Just In For You Politics World Business Analysis Sport Lifestyle Entertainment Quizzes More Search News Home Just In For You Analysis Rural Watch Live Health Indigenous Politics Science Deep Time Elections World Environment Investigations Business Local news Quizzes Sport AFL NRL Football Tennis Cricket Netball Lifestyle Wellbeing Relationships & Family Food & Recipes Personal Finance Home & Garden Entertainment TV & Movies Books Music Pop Culture Arts Facebook YouTube Instagram Twitter Emergency Backstory Newsletters 中文新闻 BERITA BAHASA INDONESIA TOK PISIN Appearance (BETA) Follow system settings Select an option Always light Always dark Follow system settings ABC iView ABC Listen ABC News News Home Attacks on trans women in Indonesia did not suddenly appear. Here's what's behind them Share Share article Attacks on trans women in Indonesia did not suddenly appear. Here's what's behind them By Raffa Athallah Topic: LGBTQIA+ Posted Sat 15 Aug 2026 at 5:04am Sat 15 Aug 2026 at 5:04am Sat 15 Aug 2026 at 5:04am , updated Sat 15 Aug 2026 at 7:57am Sat 15 Aug 2026 at 7:57am Sat 15 Aug 2026 at 7:57am Echa Wao'de says trans women who were previously able to appear in public have become afraid. ( Supplied ) abc.net.au/news/men-attack-transwomen-in-indonesia-after-rule-deems-them-threat/107023468 Link copied Share Share article Warning: This story contains details of transphobia, homophobia and violence. Read the story in bahasa Indonesia A group of men walk towards a transgender woman and douse her with what looks like urine one night on a street in Bogor, Indonesia. The victim-survivor is shocked, and after initially yelling in protest at the men, she starts to flee, footage of the July 15, 2026, attack circulating on social media shows. The attackers chase her down the street and one perpetrator attempts to hit her with what looks like a piece of wood. Loading... This was just one of 10 attacks on transgender women in Bogor between March 30 and July 15 this year, according to LGBTQIA+ advocacy group Pelangi Nusantara. The organisation's outreach campaigner, Arisdo Gonzales, said some of those attacks were on multiple trans women and there were 45 victim-survivors. Men have punched and kicked trans women, thrown stones, glass bottles, firecrackers and stripped some of them naked in the attacks, which have caused physical injury and left them traumatised, a report from the group found. Amnesty International Indonesia noted groups of between 10 and 20 men were often perpetrating the attacks, which they filmed and posted on social media. In the same statement, Amnesty noted that the attacks left some victim-survivors too afraid to make reports to police. A video captures a group of men chasing a trans woman in an attack in Bogor. ( Instagram: @bogorbersihlgbt ) It is unclear if this recent wave of attacks in Bogor represents an overall increase in violence against trans women because there is limited data on such attacks. But Indonesian LGBTQIA+ rights organisation Arus Pelangi has recorded a rise in attacks on the LGBTQIA+ community in recent years, from 28 attacks in 2024 to 66 in 2025. Trans rights activist Echa Wao'de said the violence in Bogor had left trans women living in fear. Ms Wao'de said she had accompanied trans women making police reports in several cases and alleged that some received no follow-up. "Even in the Bogor case … it was as though they accepted the case but worked on it half-heartedly," she said. 'Afraid and anxious' Ms Wao'de said the violence in Bogor highlighted the heightened risks faced by working-class trans women whose livelihoods required them to work in public spaces, often on the streets. "What if I go out and someone hits me? What if someone spits on me?" Ms Wao'de said. "Even when they are simply trying to work and earn a living, they feel afraid and anxious." Activists and analysts have attributed the recent wave of attacks to the politicisation of LGBTQIA+ issues that intensified from 2016 and culminated in a 2025 presidential regulation that classified the "spread of LGBTQ culture" as a non-military threat. "Because of the presidential regulation and discriminatory regional regulations, people feel able to commit violence arbitrarily because they believe the state has legitimised that violence," Ms Wao'de said. "[LGBTQIA+] people are human beings. I have not committed corruption. I have not broken the law. I just want to be myself. " Is being myself a threat? " Trans women have long been a part of Indonesian society and culture. ( Reuters: Ajeng Dinar Ulfiana ) Being LGBTQIA+ is not generally a criminal offence in Indonesia. Yusril Ihza Mahendra, Indonesia's Coordinating Minister of Legal Affairs, Human Rights, Immigration and Corrections, told the ABC the presidential regulation was a broader national defence policy and was not specifically aimed at LGBTQIA+ people. "What is classified as a non-military threat under the regulation is not the existence of individuals with a particular sexual orientation or gender identity," he said. He said the government was concerned about the spread of views, ideologies or cultures it considered capable of affecting national resilience, the country's foundational values, and its socio-cultural life. He rejected the suggestion that the regulation legitimised violence. "There is not a single provision in Presidential Regulation No.111 of 2025 that can be used as a basis for intimidation, discrimination, persecution or violence against anyone," Mr Mahendra said. Mr Mahendra also said anyone who committed violence against LGBTQIA+ people should be dealt with under the law. No alleged perpetrators from the Bogor attacks have been publicly identified, arrested or prosecuted, according to media reports. Indonesian police did not respond to ABC requests for comment. 'No longer treated as citizens' Activists say many trans women have limited job opportunities and need to work on the streets. ( Reuters: Ajeng Dinar Ulfiana ) The presidential regulation came into effect in October 2025 and listed "LGBTQ culture" as a threat alongside things like terrorism, radicalism, illegal trafficking, online gambling and drug abuse. Suparman Marzuki, a human rights law professor at the Islamic University of Indonesia, said its listing did not emerge suddenly. "It is a continuation of a long process of politicising LGBT issues in Indonesia, particularly since the moral panic of 2016," Professor Marzuki said, referring to a wave of rhetoric from politicians and the media that painted LGBTQIA+ people as a danger to society. "Several government officials then began portraying LGBT people not as citizens entitled to human rights, but as a threat," he said. A group of trans women gather for a photo in Jakarta in 1968 with the prominent cosmetics company owner Ayu Agung. ( Supplied: Indonesian National Library ) In 2016, then defence minister Ryamizard Ryacudu described the LGBTQIA+ movement to local media as a "threat more dangerous than nuclear warfare". At about the same time, the Indonesian Broadcasting Commission said in a statement that it discouraged broadcasters from airing programs that promoted LGBTQIA+ activities, as part of an effort to protect children. A few years later, restrictions were also implemented by local authorities, including a 2018 by-law that approved fining LGBTQIA+ people for "immoral" acts or for disturbing public order. Professor Marzuki said the 2025 presidential regulation represented a further development in that trajectory. LGBT Indonesians Indonesia's national police and military publicly warn about the "risks" of being LGBT — officials' latest verbal attack against the minority group in a country where Islamic conservativism appears on the rise. "The regulation can be understood as a shift from social stigma and political rhetoric into the official doctrine of national defence policy," he said. "They are no longer treated as citizens who must be protected, but as risks that must be monitored and controlled." Professor Marzuki said government assurances that the presidential regulation should not be used to justify violence were important, but insufficient. "The government cannot, on one hand, describe a group as a threat and, on the other, expect society to subtly understand that individuals within that group must still be protected," he said. " Policy language has social consequences. " He added that discrimination against a particular group was not always explicit. "It is often smuggled through the language of morality and public order," he said. The government's Yusril Ihza Mahendra said the state did not "reduce a person's constitutional rights because of their sexual orientation and gender identity". Trans women part of Indonesia's history Sonny Sudarma won Jakarta's inaugural beauty contest for transgender women in 1969. ( Supplied: The Antara Photography Archives ) The attack on trans women comes despite the LGBTQIA+ community long being part of Indonesia's social fabric. Benjamin Hegarty, an anthropologist with expertise in queer theory and transgender studies, said people who might now be understood as trans had been documented across the archipelago for centuries. "Trans people have always been there," he said. "They've always been in Indonesia in one form or another, stretching back many, many years … to the pre-colonial period." Benjamin Hegarty says trans people are part of Indonesian history and society. ( Supplied ) Dr Hegarty said colonial observations from the 19th century documented how people now understood to be trans women were part of life in the markets and at theatres. "The Indonesian context appeared to be one where there was greater tolerance … of trans women in public space across that period, especially compared to Europe," Dr Hegarty said. However, in the late 1940s and early 1950s, Dr Hegarty said press reports associated trans women with the streets at night, prostitution and public nuisance. Despite that, by the 1990s trans women began to emerge and be embraced in popular entertainment industries in Indonesia. Trans women and gender-nonconforming performers became familiar faces across stage shows, comedy, film and television, from the Fantastic Dolls and Dorce Gamalama to figures such as Ade Juwita and Tata Dado. Dorce Gamalama became one of Indonesia's most prominent trans celebrities. ( Instagram: @dg_kcp ) But while well-known trans women enjoyed greater acceptance, street-based trans women did not, Dr Hegarty said. Professor Marzuki warned that violence could also become more severe as three factors overlapped: labelling of LGBTQIA+ people as a threat, mobilisation of vigilante groups and weak law enforcement. "When those three elements come together, violence can escalate very quickly," he said. Mr Gonzales, from Pelangi Nusantara, said he feared violence against vulnerable groups would increasingly be seen as "normal" if the attacks continued. "The government has an obligation to protect all of its citizens without exception," he said. " We do not want to wait until a trans woman dies before everyone takes this seriously. " If this story has raised concerns for you, help is available: Urgent help: Lifeline — 13 11 14 Kids Helpline — 1800 551 800 LGBT and mental health support: Switchboard — 1800 729 367 Qlife — 1800 184 527 Headspace — 1800 650 890 Beyond Blue — 1300 22 4636 Share options Copy link Facebook X (formerly Twitter) See more ABC coverage in your search results Make ABC a preferred source in Google Top Stories Rinehart allegedly tried to help recruit Liberal MP to join One Nation Topic: One Nation Men accused of planning terrorist attack at RAF base used to strike Iran Topic: Terrorism Banks cut rewards programs, free travel insurance amid surcharge ban Topic: Banking Migration cuts, AI and rising interest rates mean an era of long-term disinflation A Analysis by Alan Kohler Hundreds of Russian hybrid attacks serve to 'wake everyone up' in NATO Topic: Surveillance Related stories Islamic exorcisms used as conversion therapy as Indonesian city moves against LGBT population Topic: Community and Society 'A new enemy': Indonesia police compare LGBT community to child groomers Topic: LGBTQIA+ 'Intolerance' making inroads in Indonesia, UN human rights chief warns Topic: World Politics Related topics Asia Crime Discrimination Indonesia LGBTQIA+ Sexuality World Politics Top Stories Rinehart allegedly tried to help recruit Liberal MP to join One Nation Topic: One Nation Men accused of planning terrorist attack at RAF base used to strike Iran Topic: Terrorism Banks cut rewards programs, free travel insurance amid surcharge ban Topic: Banking Migration cuts, AI and rising interest rates mean an era of long-term disinflation A Analysis by Alan Kohler Hundreds of Russian hybrid attacks serve to 'wake everyone up' in NATO Topic: Surveillance Just In Young Arrernte boxer sets sights on Olympics after AIS opportunity Topic: Boxing Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:07am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:07am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:07am Treasurer to unveil $6 billion improvement to federal budget LIVE Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:02am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:02am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:02am Wall Street closes higher, ASX lacks direction ahead of rates decision LIVE Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:59am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:59am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:59am Police launch murder probe after death west of Brisbane Topic: Homicide Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:57am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:57am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:57am More Just In Back to top ABC News Contact ABC News Your home of Australian stories, conversations and events that shape our nation. This service may include material from Agence France-Presse (AFP), APTN, Reuters, AAP, CNN and the BBC World Service which is copyright and cannot be reproduced. Follow ABC News Sections ABC News Home Just In For You Watch Live News Live ABC NewsRadio Politics Elections Australia World Sport Live Sport Rural Business Analysis Science Health Lifestyle Entertainment Quizzes More Topics News in Language Chinese 中文 Tok Pisin Berita Bahasa Indonesia Related ABC News app Local News ABC Emergency ABC Indigenous ABC Religion & Ethics ABC Asia ABC Pacific Music & Audio ABC Listen Home triple j Live Radio Movies & TV ABC iview Home List of ABC Shows Live TV TV Guide Kids & Students BTN Education Heywire Takeover ABC Kids Get the ABC News AM newsletter Get the latest ABC News delivered to your email inbox Email address Subscribe Your information is being handled in accordance with the ABC Privacy Collection Statement . All ABC newsletters Stay informed and connected with the ABC. Covering a wide range of topics and brands including News, iview, listen, and more. Browse all ABC newsletters ABC home Information & Services Editorial Policies Accessibility Help Contact Us Commercial Careers About the ABC Privacy Policy Terms of Use © 2026 ABC Follow the ABC We acknowledge Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the First Australians and Traditional Custodians of the lands where we live, learn and work.