Joint Statement: European LGBTI Organisations call on the Portuguese Parliament to reject bills attacking trans and intersex rights | ILGA-Europe loading... About Us Get involved Movement Building Advocacy Rainbow Map News Donate search About Us Toggle submenu back Who we are Toggle submenu back Our Constitution Standing Orders Annual reports Strategic plans How we’re funded Membership Team Work with us Media Centre Contacts Get involved Movement Building Toggle submenu back Our Annual Conference How we support the movement Our resource sharing centre How we fund the movement How we work with funders Our current programmes Advocacy Toggle submenu back Bodily Integrity Civil Rights and Freedom Health Inclusion and Equality Legal Protection Safety Rainbow Map News Facebook Instagram Youtube Vimeo LinkedIn TikTok Bluesky Threads Share Joint Statement: European LGBTI Organisations call on the Portuguese Parliament to reject bills attacking trans and intersex rights 18.03.2026 News Inclusion and Equality Access to Healthcare Intersex Legal Gender Recognition Portugal Trans scroll Proposals due to be debated in Portugal on 19 March and voted on 20 March could pave the way for rollbacks to legal gender recognition, bodily autonomy, and other existing protections for trans and intersex people. IGLYO, ILGA-Europe, OII Europe, TGEU, EL*C, and Bi+ Equal express deep alarm at the three bills due to be debated in the Portuguese Parliament on 19 March and voted on 20 March. These proposals represent a serious attack on the rights, dignity, safety and bodily autonomy of trans and intersex people in Portugal. They would mark a significant regression in a country that has, until now, been regarded as an important point of reference for legal protection in Europe. If adopted into law, Portugal would lose at least 4 places on the ILGA-Europe Rainbow Map ranking — dropping below Sweden, the Netherlands, Ireland, and France. As reported by local organisations , this legislative package would roll back legal gender recognition based on self-determination — guaranteed until now by a 2018 law — and reintroduce medical gatekeeping and pathologising requirements, taking trans rights back to 2011. This proposal would also restrict legal gender recognition for young people, including those aged 16 to 18, and ban gender-affirming medical care for minors. The package would strip away protections for people whose gender is not reflected in their identity documents, including young people, migrants and non-binary people, and would remove affirmative, non-discrimination measures in schools. These proposals would also erase protections for intersex children from non-consensual, medically unnecessary interventions — forbidden since 2018 by the same law . Less than 6 months after voting to adopt the Committee of Ministers’ Recommendation on equal rights for intersex persons, this step from Portugal would make it the first to actively regress on intersex rights and clearly undermine even very recent human rights commitments. These proposals instrumentalise harmful narratives that portray trans and intersex people as a problem to be controlled rather than as rights-holders entitled to dignity, safety, healthcare and recognition. What is happening in Portugal does not emerge in a vacuum. Across Europe, we are witnessing how some political parties have increasingly targeted trans and intersex people using similar tactics: invoking “biological sex”, “family protection”, and “child protection” to justify rollbacks on rights, including in Bulgaria, Slovakia, and Hungary in the EU. We call on the Portuguese Parliament not to join the growing list of countries where trans and intersex people are used as political targets to legitimise wider democratic backsliding. We call on all members of the Portuguese Parliament to reject these bills in full. Signatories IGLYO ILGA-Europe OII Europe TGEU EL*C Bi+ Equal Source Photo by Anja on Unsplash See also News 01.09.2026 Joint statement: Bulgaria’s Supreme Court opens the door to legal gender recognition, ending years of judicial deadlock ILGA-Europe, Bilitis, Deystvie and TGEU – Trans Europe and Central Asia welcome the Bulgarian Supreme Court’s decisions as overdue and a great relief to trans people in Bulgaria. At the […] read more News 20.07.2026 UK Government’s Final KCSIE Guidance Fails to Protect Trans, Non-Binary and Intersex Children and Young People IGLYO, TGEU, ILGA-Europe, OII Europe, the European Pride Business Network, The Kite Trust, Trans+ Solidarity Alliance, TransActual, and Saba Ali – Equalities Advocate express serious […] read more News 01.06.2026 New UK draft Code of Practice intensifies exclusion of trans people TGEU, ILGA-Europe, IGLYO, OII Europe, EL*C, Rainbow Cities Network, the European Pride Business Network and the European Forum of LGBTI+ Christian Groups are deeply alarmed […] read more News 31.03.2026 Romanian court victory confirms recognition of trans identities across the EU Romanian court confirms obligation to recognise gender identity registered in another EU member state, following landmark Court of Justice of the European Union ruling. Today, […] read more News 12.03.2026 Landmark CJEU ruling demands Member States to ensure legal gender recognition to guarantee freedom of movement Today’s judgment by the Court of Justice of the EU (CJEU) says all member states must provide for legal gender recognition procedures allowing their citizens […] read more Report 04.02.2026 Intersections 2.0: Key Findings on LGBTIQ Health in Europe In 2023, the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights (FRA) conducted its third LGBTIQ survey, gathering responses from more than 100,000 LGBTIQ people across the […] read more Press Release 07.10.2025 Watershed Moment as Council of Europe Sets First Standard Protecting Intersex Rights The Council of Europe’s 46 Member States have unanimously adopted the Recommendation of the Committee of Ministers to Member States on Equal Rights for Intersex […] read more News 09.09.2025 Joint Statement: Landmark CJEU opinion demands legal gender recognition across EU A new opinion from Advocate General of the Court of Justice of the European Union says all member states must recognise the lived gender of […] read more News 07.08.2025 French Court orders end to mandatory gender titles on train tickets The ruling follows a CJEU judgment and marks a major step for data protection and gender inclusivity in the EU. France’s Supreme Administrative Court (Conseil […] read more News Press Release 10.07.2025 Semenya v. Switzerland: Grand Chamber of the European Court of Human Rights Judgment Joint press release of the third-party interveners Today, 10 July 2025, in a pivotal judgment, the Grand Chamber of the European Court of Human Rights […] read more Press Release 12.06.2025 European Court rules Czech Republic violated trans rights with forced sterilisation In a pivotal judgment delivered today, the European Court of Human Rights (ECtHR) has found that the Czech Republic violates the rights of trans people […] read more News 22.05.2025 Joint Statement: CJEU to rule on landmark case regarding ban on legal gender recognition in Bulgaria The European Court of Justice has held a pivotal hearing in the Shipov case, challenging Bulgaria’s de facto ban on legal gender recognition and whether […] read more News 13.03.2025 Joint statement welcoming EU’s top court judgment to correct a trans man’s gender identity data in national registry Today, the European Court of Justice (CJEU) issued a judgment in the case of Deldits (C-247/23), stating that national authorities responsible for keeping public registers […] read more News 05.03.2025 ILGA-Europe Statement: Turkey is detaining LGBTI+ activists and journalists, and targeting basic rights The Turkish government has intensified its repression of LGBTI+ human rights defenders, detaining activists and introducing draconian laws that further restrict legal gender recognition, trans […] read more Press Release 18.02.2025 New Era of Coordinated Attacks on Foundations of Fundamental Rights, European Report Finds A major report published today identifies how LGBTI people are being weaponized to erode the foundations of freedom and democracy across Europe. Released today, February […] read more News 18.12.2024 Joint statement on the decision to ban puberty blockers for trans youth in the UK The recent decision to indefinitely ban the private prescription of puberty blockers for trans youth in the UK marks a profoundly troubling development in the […] read more News 09.12.2024 New regulations pose greater risks to trans people in Turkey New changes from the Turkish authorities to the accessibility of hormones for trans people further threaten health and lives On 20 November, the Turkish Medicines […] read more Press Release 18.10.2024 The ILGA-Europe conference, the largest LGBTI conference in Europe and Central Asia, meets in Bucharest this weekend The ILGA-Europe Annual Conference, the largest LGBTI conference of its kind in Europe, has brought over 400 LGBTI activists from across Europe and Central Asia […] read more News 04.10.2024 Joint statement: EU Court of Justice strengthens trans rights by calling for the automatic recognition in birth certificates ACCEPT, TGEU and ILGA-Europe welcome today’s decision of the Court of Justice of the EU (CJEU) said that the refusal of an EU Member State […] read more News 12.09.2024 Joint statement: EU Court of Justice Advocate General calls on Hungary to correct trans refugee’s gender marker in national registries Háttér Society, ILGA-Europe and TGEU welcome an opinion from the Advocate General of the Court of Justice of the European Union stating that Hungarian immigration […] read more News 06.09.2024 Joint statement: Trans children and young people in schools deserve safety and understanding This statement was drafted by IGLYO with input from UK inclusive education experts and Members, and was endorsed by ILGA-Europe and Transgender Europe (TGEU). Returning […] read more News 01.08.2024 Joint statement on Italian Constitutional Court ruling on non-binary & trans persons’ rights ILGA-Europe and TGEU welcome a judgement of the Italian Constitutional Court finding that non-binary peoples’ rights are protected under the Italian Constitution In a judgment […] read more News 17.07.2024 Trans woman should have been allowed access to hormone therapy in prison, says European Court The European Court of Human Rights has found that Poland violated Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights, protecting the right to private […] read more Blog 14.07.2024 What European countries might soon start recognising non-binary people? Interested in the current state of non-binary rights in Europe? This concise guide covers the most important updates and developments you should be aware of […] read more News 12.07.2024 Joint Statement welcoming European Court ruling that Russia’s trans parent’s foster-care termination violates family rights In a judgement published yesterday, the European Court of Human Rights found that Russia violated the right to private and family life of a trans […] read more News 09.07.2024 Joint Statement: European Court confirms requirement for legal gender recognition in Bulgaria despite rejected complaint TGEU, ILGA-Europe, Bilitis, and the Bulgarian Helsinki Committee welcome the European Court of Human Rights’ confirmation of Bulgaria’s obligation to provide for reliable legal gender […] read more Blog 28.06.2024 Remarkable and resilient Prides across Europe Amid political turmoil, war, social issues and cultural changes, Pride celebrations in Europe continue to demonstrate the resilience and determination of LGBTI communities Today, on […] read more News 04.06.2024 Joint Statement: Milestone for trans and intersex rights in Europe ILGA-Europe, TGEU, OII Europe, IGLYO and EL*C jointly welcome the inclusion of SOGIGESC grounds in new EU Directive on minimum standards for equality bodies On […] read more News 03.06.2024 European court hears landmark case on trans rights in Hungary The Court of Justice of the European Union held a significant hearing today concerning legal gender recognition for trans people in Hungary Today, the Court […] read more News 10.05.2024 EU Court of Justice Advocate General calls for automatic recognition of legal gender recognition in birth certificates In a significant development regarding the rights of trans people in the European Union, the Advocate General of the Court of Justice of the European […] read more Subscribe to our newsletter Subscribe Highlights Who we are Team Work with us Annual Conference 2026 Rainbow Map News Contacts We are always open to hearing from you, whether it’s to find out more information about an aspect of our work, for a media enquiry, or to ask a question about our organisation. Click here for the form to contact us. Co-funded by the European Union. Views and opinions expressed are however those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union or of the granting authority. Neither the European Union nor the granting authority can be held responsible for them. ILGA-Europe gratefully acknowledge support from: Facebook Instagram Youtube Vimeo LinkedIn TikTok Bluesky Threads Copyright 2026 ILGA-Europe Powered by SOLOS Privacy policy loading...