Current and emerging threats to trans and gender diverse human rights: Australian Human Rights Commission - ANROWS - Australia's National Research Organisation for Women's Safety Feeling unsafe? Find support services emergency? call 000 FONT SIZE A+ / A- Donate Subscribe Research Resources News and events About US Your path Find the right resources for your needs. To help you find the right information we have collated key information relevant to the different members of our community. Please select the group that you relate to most from the list on the right. I am a… Government official or policy-maker Peak or advocacy body Practitioner Researcher Student Victim/survivor of domestic, family, or sexual violence Media representative I'm not sure I'M INTERESTED IN Statistics: prevalence and community attitudes Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities Culturally and linguistically diverse communities Women with disabilities Sexual violence and assault Children, young people and parenting Health, justice and systems-wide responses LGBTQ communities Perpetrator interventions Prevention Research Our research Violence against women and children affects everybody. It impacts on the health, wellbeing and safety of a significant proportion of Australians throughout all states and territories and places an enormous burden on the nation’s economy across family and community services, health and hospitals, income-support and criminal justice systems. ANROWS Research Australian National Research Agenda National Risk Assessment Principles and Risk Factors National Community Attitudes Survey (NCAS) Death review program Sexual harassment People who use domestic, family and sexual violence Action research and evaluation Research grants Our research fund Explore all research projects anrows publications Publications suite Research to policy and practice papers Research reports Insights and special collections State of knowledge papers RESEARCH DATABASES The ANROWS Evidence Portal ANROWS Digital Library Register of active research KNOWLEDGE TRANSFER News and events ANROWS hosts events as part of its knowledge transfer and exchange work, including public lectures, workshops and research launches. Details of upcoming ANROWS activities and news are available from the list on the right. News News Media releases Subscribe to our mailing list Events Events ANROWS Conference ANROWS & The Healing Foundation partnership: WorkUP Queensland ANROWS About ANROWS ANROWS was established by the Commonwealth and all state and territory governments of Australia to produce, disseminate and assist in applying evidence for policy and practice addressing violence against women and children. ABOUT ANROWS Who we are Our leadership Australian National Research Agenda to End Violence against Women and Children ANROWS Board Governance Stakeholders Reconciliation Careers Donate Contact us Feedback & complaints KNOWLEDGE TRANSFER Resources To support the take-up of evidence, ANROWS offers a range of resources developed from research to support practitioners and policy-makers in delivering evidence-based interventions. RESOURCES Resources Webinar program The Australian policy context Inquiries and submissions RESEARCH DATABASES ANROWS Evidence Portal ANROWS Digital Library Register of active research Home Current and emerging threats t... SUBMISSION Current and emerging threats to trans and gender diverse human rights: Australian Human Rights Commission This ANROWS submission sets out the evidence on current and emerging threats to trans and gender diverse human rights. Due to the sparsity of research in this area, ANROWS recommends further research to inform interventions and initiatives. ANROWS provided a submission to the Australian Human Rights Commission into current and emerging threats to trans and gender diverse human rights. The submission drew on our evidence base to highlight systemic barriers and challenges, including discrimination, faced by trans women in accessing essential services; patterns of discrimination, harassment and violence targeting trans women in public, private and online spaces; and measures that can challenge anti-trans sentiment and discrimination. ANROWS recommends that the Commission consider: the importance of co-design with a wide range of services including multicultural women’s services and LGBTQ services when developing initiatives aimed at addressing anti-trans sentiment and discrimination the need for community-wide, multifaceted interventions to encourage cultural change and challenge societal attitudes which support, condone or trivialise violence towards trans and gender diverse individuals. This submission will be of interest to policymakers, practitioners and researchers interested in addressing safety and wellbeing for trans and gender diverse individuals. This submission draws primarily on the experiences of trans women of colour and findings from the “ Crossing the line: Lived experience of sexual violence among trans women of colour from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds in Australia ” project. Suggested citation Australia’s National Research Organisation for Women’s Safety. (2024). Re: Call for Submissions: Current and emerging threats to trans and gender diverse human rights [Submission no. 4]. ANROWS. DOWNLOAD Current and emerging threats to trans and gender diverse human rights: Australian Human Rights Commission. Download See also ONLINE EXHIBITION Crossing the line: Lived experience of sexual violence among trans women of colour from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds in Australia Feeling unsafe? If you, or another adult or child, are in immediate danger call 000. Find support services Subscribe. Subscribe to receive news and updates directly to your inbox. Name First Last Email * By subscribing, you agree to have your information stored in our Content Management Systems (CMS), including HubSpot and WordPress. We use this information to manage your subscription and send you updates. For more details, please refer to our Privacy policy Please contact enquiries@anrows.org.au with any concerns. CAPTCHA Or connect with us I am Practitioner Researcher Government official or policy maker Peak or advocacy body Student Victim/survivor of domestic, family, or sexual violence Media representative I’m not sure I'm Interested In Statistics: Prevalence and community attitudes Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Research Culturally and linguistically diverse communities Women with disability Sexual violence and assault Children, young people and parenting Health, justice and system-wide responses LGBTIQ+ communities Perpetrator interventions Prevention ANROWS Research All research projects Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Research Community attitudes People who use domestic, family and sexual violence Sexual harassment Action research and evaluation Events Events ANROWS National Research Conference ANROWS Publications Publications suite Research to policy and practice papers Research reports Insights and special collections State of knowledge papers Research Databases The ANROWS Evidence Portal ANROWS Digital Library Register of Active Research Resources Resources The Australian policy context Inquiries and submissions News News Media releases About ANROWS Who we are Our leadership Australian National Research Agenda 2023-2028 ANROWS Board Governance Stakeholders Reconciliation Careers Donate Contact us Feedback & complaints I am Practitioner Researcher Government official or policy maker Peak or advocacy body Student Victim/survivor of domestic, family, or sexual violence Media representative I’m not sure I'm Interested In Statistics: Prevalence and community attitudes Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Research Culturally and linguistically diverse communities Women with disability Sexual violence and assault Children, young people and parenting Health, justice and system-wide responses LGBTIQ+ communities Perpetrator interventions Prevention ANROWS Research All research projects Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Research Community attitudes People who use domestic, family and sexual violence Sexual harassment Action research and evaluation Events Events ANROWS National Research Conference ANROWS Publications Publications suite Research to policy and practice papers Research reports Insights and special collections State of knowledge papers Research Databases The ANROWS Evidence Portal ANROWS Digital Library Register of Active Research Resources Fact Sheet Guidelines Video Infographic Workbook Podcast Poster Webinar Links News News Media releases About ANROWS Who we are Our leadership Australian National Research Agenda 2023-2028 ANROWS Board Governance Stakeholders Reconciliation Careers Donate Contact us Feedback & complaints PO Box Q389, Queen Victoria Building NSW 1230 Email: enquiries@anrows.org.au ANROWS acknowledges the Traditional Owners of the land across Australia on which we live and work. We pay our respects to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Elders past and present. We value Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander histories, cultures and knowledge. We are committed to standing and working with First Nations peoples. ABN: 67 162 349 171 Copyright Disclaimer Privacy ©2026 ANROWS Research Resources News and events About US I am a… Government official or policy-maker Peak or advocacy body Practitioner Researcher Student Victim/survivor of domestic, family, or sexual violence Media representative I'm not sure I'M INTERESTED IN Statistics: prevalence and community attitudes Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities Culturally and linguistically diverse communities Women with disabilities Sexual violence and assault Children, young people and parenting Health, justice and systems-wide responses LGBTQ communities Perpetrator interventions Prevention ANROWS Research Australian National Research Agenda National Risk Assessment Principles and Risk Factors National Community Attitudes Survey (NCAS) Death review program Sexual harassment People who use domestic, family and sexual violence Action research and evaluation Research grants Our research fund Explore all research projects anrows publications Publications suite Research to policy and practice papers Research reports Insights and special collections State of knowledge papers RESEARCH DATABASES The ANROWS Evidence Portal ANROWS Digital Library Register of active research News News Media releases Subscribe to our mailing list Events Events ANROWS Conference ANROWS & The Healing Foundation partnership: WorkUP Queensland ABOUT ANROWS Who we are Our leadership Australian National Research Agenda to End Violence against Women and Children ANROWS Board Governance Other Items Stakeholders Reconciliation Careers Donate Contact us Feedback & complaints RESOURCES Resources Webinar program The Australian policy context Inquiries and submissions RESEARCH DATABASES ANROWS Evidence Portal ANROWS Digital Library Register of active research ANROWS acknowledges the traditional owners of the land across Australia on which we work and live. Copyright Disclaimer Privacy ©ANROWS 2024 Back to top