Sudan drops death penalty for homosexuality Now Reading Sudan drops death penalty for homosexuality Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate Sudan drops death penalty for homosexuality by Colin Stewart July 15, 2020 Colin Stewart Colin Stewart is a 45-year journalism veteran living in Southern… Read Next Eroding support for laws threatening death for gay sex The East African nation of Sudan has removed the death penalty as a punishment for homosexuality, leaving life imprisonment as the maximum penalty for a third offense. From the African Human Rights Media Network The location of Sudan in East Africa. The Sudanese Sovereign Council also eliminated the imposition of 100 lashes as a punishment for same-sex intimacy, but left a punishment of up to five years in prison for a first offense. It established a penalty of up to seven years for a second offense. Bedaaya, the LGBTQ+ rights advocacy organization of Egypt and Sudan, hailed the full package of reforms as “as a great step toward reforming the justice system in Sudan.” Although Sudan’s anti-gay Article 148 is still in force, Bedaaya stated, “the queer movement in Sudan is fully aware of the importance of its continuous and dedicated work to advocate for decriminalization.” Sudan’s repeal of the death penalty left a total of six nations with laws that allow for executions for gay sex. (See the article “6 nations have death penalty for gay sex; 4 carry it out” .) See Also Coming out in Nigeria is a difficult journey Sudan has been in turmoil since long-time ruler Omar al-Bashir was overthrown in April 2019. The military and pro-democracy advocates have been in a power struggle over the course of a power-sharing agreement between the military and civilian groups. The regime has been under pressure from street protests demanding faster and more comprehensive reforms The latest response to that pressure was the July 9 action by Sudan’s Sovereign Council in approving the package of reform laws, including making female genital mutilation a crime, dropping the law against turning away from Islam, and ending the death penalty for gay sex and for all convicted children and senior citizens. Colin Stewart July 15, 2020 The Latest Posts Turkey’s anti-LGBT crackdown expands; activists fight back Proposed Ukraine law would expand ban on anti-LGBTQ discrimination A third of LGBTQ groups say 2025’s drastic cuts will force them to close Bangladesh activists launch petition to end anti-LGBTQ discrimination Uganda’s ‘Not Free’ rating partly due to anti-LGBT laws Appeal to Indonesia to stop listing ‘LGBTQ culture’ as a national threat LGBTI+ rights activists in Turkey seek international support during crackdown Analysis: Cameroon’s anti-gay raids violated Cameroon’s own rules Ghana’s £10m deal is dead; gay fans won’t be lured to homophobic nation Turkey: 162 targeted in anti-LGBTQ+ raids Strong rebukes for Malaysian minister’s anti-trans stance Previous Article Eroding support for laws threatening death for gay sex Next Article View Comment (1) John Adewoye says: July 19, 2020 at 5:03 am Thank you for not killing us again. But it is simply stupid of Sudan to think life in prison can control homosexuality. Prison is divided by gender. Main means of sexual release in prisons and dormitories is homosexual acts. Reply Leave a Reply Cancel reply Your email address will not be published. Name * E-mail * Website Notify me of new posts by email. Δ Related Posts Spotlight on Egypt: Repression, discrimination, online entrapment Outright launches important reports on LGBTQ rights in every country LGBTQ advocacy group creates online safety guide for Middle East and North Africa ‘The World’s Richest Men Take On the World’s Poorest Children’ American-made catastrophe: Growing toll of losses and deaths from USAID demolition Niger leader plans to outlaw gay sex, execute married same-sex couples About The Erasing 76 Crimes news site covers the human toll of 66+ countries’ anti-gay laws and the struggle to repeal them. Member Members of the African Human Rights Media Network publish news articles and other media that educate readers about sexual minorities’ struggle for recognition of their human rights. Partner The St. Paul’s Foundation for International Reconciliation promotes LGBTQ+ rights through fact-based advocacy journalism and community projects. (California charity 80-0647355) © 2026 Erasing 76crimes. All rights reserved. Scroll To Top Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate Facebook Twitter Instagram Discover more from Erasing 76 Crimes Subscribe now to keep reading and get access to the full archive. Type your email… Subscribe Continue reading PRESS ESC TO CLOSE