Gay rights in Gibraltar: Gibraltar puts same-sex marriage bill before Parliament | Spain | EL PAÍS English Skip to content _ _ _ _ Select: - - - España América México Colombia Chile Argentina US Español US English Spain subscribe H HOLA LOG IN Spain Madrid Barcelona Latest News SAME SEX MARRIAGE Gibraltar puts same-sex marriage bill before Parliament Popular consultation and main parties suggest support for gay rights in British Overseas Territory Jesús A. Cañas Cádiz - Aug 15, 2016 - 12:12 CEST Share on Whatsapp Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Desplegar Redes Sociales Go to comments Prefer EL PAÍS on Google Compartir: Whatsapp Facebook Twitter Bluesky Linkedin Copy link Gay rights supporters in Dublin. GETTYIMAGES Gibraltar took a decisive step toward recognizing same-sex marriage on Monday when its government announced a draft bill to modify the British Overseas Territory’s Civil Marriage Act. The bill will now go before parliament, which will approve the change to the law in six-weeks, as required by the Constitution. The draft bill follows a popular consultation carried out in December 2015, the Gibraltar Socialist Labour Party and Liberal coalition on the issue of same-sex marriage. “After the community showed its overwhelming support, the date for the consultation was extended to allow more people to participate,” says a source in the Gibraltar administration. So far, some 3,490 people have responded to the consultation, out of a total electorate of 24,117. The draft bill to change the Civil Marriage Act to give people of the same sex the same matrimonial rights as heterosexual couples The draft bill was due to be presented in June, but the UK’s decision to leave the E U, as well as the electorate’s interest in the issue, delayed the government’s decision. Chief Minister Fabian Picardo said that the consultation process revealed that Gibraltarians are polarized on the issue of same-sex marriage. “Both sides believe they are right and that the government must support their stance immediately. This delicate issue was so important that I decided to preside over an inter-ministerial committee with the goal of giving careful consideration to all points of view. We have not taken this issue lightly and we have given it the respect it deserves,” he added. The draft bill to change the Civil Marriage Act to give people of the same sex the same matrimonial rights as heterosexual couples. This was one of the key issues for the Equality Rights Group, which has been fighting for the rights of the LGBT community in Gibraltar. “It has come very late, there has been a lot of maneuvering, but it’s arrived and we’re grateful,” said Félix Álvarez, president of Gibraltar LGBT. Álvarez says he will now study the draft bill closely. “We don’t want a legalized apartheid; we want gay rights to be fully incorporated ino the Marriage Act.” Gibraltar’s opposition Social Democrats said in January it would support legislation in favor of same sex marriage. GSD Daniel Feetham said his party would continue its long-standing policy of allowing members of Parliament a free vote on matters of conscience and that he would defend the right of its members to their own individual opinion. Marriage, he said, is a very important institution 'that binds people who love each other together' and all GSD MPs are in favour of the state opening this up to same sex couples. Sign up for our newsletter EL PAÍS English Edition has launched a weekly newsletter. Sign up today to receive a selection of our best stories in your inbox every Saturday morning. For full details about how to subscribe, click here Gibraltar has autonomy over its laws except for foreign policy and defense. The Rock’s decision to modify the Marriage Act comes three years after the United Kingdom approved same-sex marriage in 2013. Until 2010, it was not possible for same-sex couples to live in council-owned property. Spain introduced same sex-marriage in 2005 . Álavarez says that Gibraltar’s delays in recognizing gay rights is in part due to “historical” reasons. “The closed border with Spain during the Franco years perhaps closed us off to the advances being made in the rest of Europe,” he said. In 2014, Gibraltar allowed same-sex civil partnerships, but that do not provide couples with the same rights as under marriage. English version by Nick Lyne . Sign up to EL PAÍS US Edition bulletin Spain El País in English on Facebook Spain El País in English on Twitter Comments Go to comments Rules › Mis comentarios Rules Rellena tu nombre y apellido para comentar completar datos Log into El País to participate I already have a subscription Please enable JavaScript to view the <a href="https://disqus.com/?ref_noscript" rel="nofollow"> comments powered by Disqus.</a> Close More information A decade after legalization, same-sex weddings make up less than 2% of total Alejandra Torres Reyes | Madrid Chile grants same-sex couples civil partnership licenses Rocío Montes | Chile Adheres to More information If you are interested in licensing this content, click here _ Últimas noticias 06:00 Is there a 10% chance that AI will kill us all? 06:00 From Mamdani’s veto to enthusiasm in Estonia: Schools around the world are grappling with the use of AI 06:00 The perfect, affordable home: The utopia that architecture has been promising for a century 06:00 Middle East conflicts push Europe toward a second energy crisis in five years Most viewed Mexican courts back US woman who accused a fake Tijuana clinic of malpractice Trump’s plan to ban diesel exports aggravates Europe and Latin America’s energy crisis From Opus Dei alumni to McKinsey consultants: The clans that run Spain’s biggest companies Maricarmen: Eviction of elderly woman in Madrid sparks social and political outrage ICE is laying off agents hired during its rapid expansion after discovering discrepancies in their backgrounds Recomendaciones EL PAÍS Cursos Centros Francés online Inglés online Italiano online Alemán online Crucigramas & Juegos Cursos cursos Máster en Project Management cursos Máster en Internet Business cursos Máster Universitario en Psicopedagogía cursos Máster Universitario en Energías Renovables Centros cursosonline Técnico Superior en Integración Social cursosonline Técnico Superior en Educación Infantil cursosonline Máster en Comercio Internacional cursosonline Máster en Producción Editorial y Diseño Gráfico Francés online cursosingles Mejora tu francés con una Learning Serie. cursosingles Episodios diarios, culturales y personalizados. cursosingles Evaluación de nivel y certificado pedagógico al acabar la formación. cursosingles Prueba 7 días gratis y sin compromiso. Inglés online cursosingles Mejora tu inglés con con una Learning Serie. cursosingles Episodios diarios, culturales y personalizados. cursosingles Evaluación de nivel y certificado pedagógico al acabar la formación. cursosingles Prueba 7 días gratis y sin compromiso. Italiano online cursosingles Mejora tu italiano con una Learning Serie. cursosingles Episodios diarios, culturales y personalizados. cursosingles Evaluación de nivel y certificado pedagógico al acabar la formación. cursosingles Prueba 7 días gratis y sin compromiso. Alemán online cursosingles Mejora tu alemán con una Learning Serie. cursosingles Episodios diarios, culturales y personalizados. cursosingles Evaluación de nivel y certificado pedagógico al acabar la formación. cursosingles Prueba 7 días gratis y sin compromiso. Crucigramas & Juegos juegos Crucigramas minis juegos Crucigramas Tarkus juegos Sudokus mini juegos Sopas de letras Recomendaciones EL PAÍS Cursos Centros Italiano online Francés online Alemán online Crucigramas & Juegos Cursos cursos Maestría en Innovación y Tecnología Educativa cursos Maestría en Educación Especial cursos Maestría en Ciberseguridad cursos Maestría en Logística y Cadena de Suministro Centros cursosonline DIRECTORIO DE CENTROS DE FORMACIÓN cursosonline Maestría en Energías Renovables y Eficiencia Energética cursosonline Máster en Gestión del Patrimonio Cultural y Museología cursosonline Maestría oficial en Terapias Psicológicas de Tercera Generación Italiano online cursosingles Mejora tu italiano con una Learning Serie. cursosingles Episodios diarios, culturales y personalizados. cursosingles Evaluación de nivel y certificado pedagógico al acabar la formación. cursosingles Prueba 7 días gratis y sin compromiso. Francés online cursosingles Mejora tu francés con una Learning Serie. cursosingles Episodios diarios, culturales y personalizados. cursosingles Evaluación de nivel y certificado pedagógico al acabar la formación. cursosingles Prueba 7 días gratis y sin compromiso. Alemán online cursosingles Mejora tu alemán con una Learning Serie. cursosingles Episodios diarios, culturales y personalizados. cursosingles Evaluación de nivel y certificado pedagógico al acabar la formación. cursosingles Prueba 7 días gratis y sin compromiso. Crucigramas & Juegos juegos ¡Disfruta con nuestros Crucigramas para expertos! juegos Palabra secreta juegos Juega a nuestros Sudoku medio y mejora día a día tu nivel juegos Juega a las nuevas Sopas de letras clásicas y temáticas de EL PAÍS _ _ HOLA Subscribe for € 1 My activity My Subscription My personal data My newsletters Rights and de-registration Events and experiences Asistente Vera IA logout Close change contrast: Buscar Select: - - - España América México Colombia Chile Argentina US Español US English If you want to follow all the latest news without any limits, subscribe to EL PAÍS for just €1 the first month SUBSCRIBE NOW International U.S. Economy And Business Science Health Technology Climate People Lifestyle Opinion Culture Sports EPS Latest News Newsletter Follow on: El País in English on Facebook El País in English on Twitter El País in English on Youtube El País in English on Instagram Close