Seimas Ombudsperson: Lithuanian Police Failed to Guarantee LGBT Community’s Right to Peaceful Assembly - LGL LGL National LGBT Rights Organization Main menu Skip to primary content Skip to secondary content Home About LGL # News Press Releases Events About Us Mission and Goals People Photo Gallery Video Activities Projects Publications Reports Procurement LGBT Centre Information Activities Library Campaigns Europride 2027 Baltic pride 2025 LT Pride 2024 Baltic Pride 2019 Rainbow Days 2018 #BP16 #LAISVA_LT #TRANS_LT Change it # Contacts Requisites Photo Bank Supporters Friends Human Rights # News LGBT* Rights in Lithuania Legal Situation Further Reading LGBT Guide LT News From Lithuania From the World Visiting Lithuania LGBT Map Clubs & Bars Sports Events Get involved! # Volunteer! European Voluntary Service Internships Advertise # Take Part! Membership Support! # Donate Online Anonymous Donations # Online Store Fundraising Campaigns #BP16 LT Search Post navigation ← Previous Next → Seimas Ombudsperson: Lithuanian Police Failed to Guarantee LGBT Community’s Right to Peaceful Assembly Posted on: 9:00, April 05 (Fri), 2024 2024-04-03T13:59:35+00:00 Categories: News Tweet The Seimas Ombudsperson Erika Leonaitė found that the police officers’ inadequate response to the actions of hostile provocateurs during a peaceful assembly organised by the Lithuanian Gay League (LGL) did not guarantee the right of the participants of the assembly to peaceful assembly. The Seimas Ombudsman recommended that the Commissioner General of Police should take measures to ensure that, in future, participants who have obtained a permit to organise an assembly are guaranteed in all cases the practical and effective exercise of their right to peaceful assembly, especially when the full exercise of the right to peaceful assembly is threatened by the actions of agents provocateurs or hostile persons. In light of the information and videos that appeared in the public space, the Seimas Ombudsperson conducted an investigation on her own initiative into the meeting that took place on 28 September last year, during which police officers did not react to the actions of hostile persons, and the meeting was interrupted as a result. Participants gathered at the protest to express their concern about the Law on the Protection of Minors against the Detrimental Effects of Public Information, which contains a discriminatory provision against the LGBT community, and to urge MPs to take into account the decision of the European Court of Human Rights in the case of Macatė v. Lithuania . Leonaitė noted that the examined video recordings show that the provocateurs did not intend to exercise their right to counter-meeting, but they deliberately carried out actions aimed at disrupting the meeting, such as physically intruding among the participants of the meeting and exerting psychological pressure on them, and using the poles of the national flags as sticks. The freedom and right to assemble is enshrined in both national legislation and international documents and jurisprudence, which emphasise that, in guaranteeing the right to assemble, the state must also ensure the safety of the participants in the assembly. The Seimas Ombudsperson pointed out that in the case in question, the right of assembly was sought to be exercised by a vulnerable group of society. The ECtHR has repeatedly held that the right to freedom of peaceful assembly includes a positive obligation on the part of the State to provide adequate protection to the participants in the assembly, and that this obligation becomes particularly relevant when persons belonging to minority groups seek to exercise these rights. “The positive obligation to ensure the effective exercise of the right to peaceful assembly is particularly important, inter alia, in cases where the meeting is aimed at drawing attention to discriminatory provisions and practices in legislation, raising issues of ensuring the rights of vulnerable and/or stigmatised groups of society, which are more likely to face discrimination”, – said Ms Leonaitė. According to her, “it is necessary to underline that the Constitutional Court has also noted that freedom of assembly is one of the fundamental human freedoms and values in a democratic society. It is an inherent feature of a democratic system. Through freedom of assembly, the right of individuals to participate in peaceful assembly and to freely express their opinions and views is realised, as well as the expression of personal civic activism”. You are here: Home News Seimas Ombudsperson: Lithuanian Police Failed to Guarantee LGBT Community’s Right to Peaceful Assembly Categories News Published Posted on: 2024-04-05 9:00 Related posts Combating Online Hate: LGL Co-organised the International INACH Conference Read the article → Who Is Responsible for Hate Speech Amplified by Algorithms? Read the article → Joining Forces to Strengthen Women’s and LGBTI Rights in Lithuania Read the article → Important items submenu Newsletter I agree to my email being stored and used to receive the newsletter Support! Events Calendar Upcoming << Sep 2026 >> M T W T F S S 31 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 1 2 3 4 No events Subscribe to our Newsletter I agree to my email being stored and used to receive the newsletter Bottom Menu # Home Contacts Privacy policy News About LGL Press Releases Human Rights LGBT Guide LT About LGL News About Us Activities LGBT Centre Campaigns Contacts Human Rights News LGBT* Rights in Lithuania LGBT Guide LT News Visiting Lithuania # Get involved! Support! Lietuviška versija ©2019 LGL Association Lithuanian Gay League Address: Odminių str. 11-4, LT-01122, Vilnius, Lithuania Code: 291902980 Tel: +370 5 2610314 Fax: +370 5 2130762 E-mail: office@gay.lt Creation of the website was financed by the sub-project of NGO Fund of the Lithuanian-Swiss Cooperation Programme. This website uses cookies to ensure you get the best experience on our website. Read More ACCEPT Privacy & Cookies Policy necessary Always Enabled non-necessary