Indonesia: Police must release 75 people arrested in discriminatory raid on “gay party” - Amnesty International Indonesia: Police must release 75 people arrested in discriminatory raid on “gay party” - Amnesty International Which language would you like to use this site in? English Español Français العربية 简中 繁中 Русский Close English Who We Are How We’re Run Work with us What We Do Countries Get Involved Take Action Become a member Take an online course Latest News Campaigns Education Research Impact Search Donate Now ul" aria-expanded="false" aria-controls="mobile-menu" aria-label="Open navigation" > Who We Are Who We Are How We’re Run Work with us What We Do Countries Get Involved Get Involved Take Action Become a member Take an online course Latest Latest News Campaigns Education Research Impact Search © LOVE_LIFE News 24 June 2025 Indonesia: Police must release 75 people arrested in discriminatory raid on “gay party” Responding to the arrest of 75 people in a raid on a gathering described by police as a “gay party” in the Indonesian city of Bogor, near the capital city of Jakarta, Amnesty International Indonesia’s Deputy Director Wirya Adiwena said: “This discriminatory raid on a privately rented villa is a blatant violation of human rights and privacy that exemplifies the hostile environment for LGBTI people in Indonesia. This gathering violated no law and posed no threat. “The Indonesian authorities must end these hate-based and humiliating raids. No one should be subjected to arrest, intimidation or public shaming because of their actual or perceived sexual orientation or gender identity. “The police must immediately release all those arrested. Indonesia’s government must also take urgent steps to ensure accountability for human rights violations committed by the police, and work toward creating an environment where LGBTI individuals and their allies can live free from fear and harassment.” Background Police in the city of Bogor confirmed on Monday night that they had conducted a raid on a gathering, described as a “gay party,” at a villa in the Puncak area on Sunday 22 June, arresting 75 individuals (74 men, 1 woman). The local police chief said the raid was carried out following reports from the public regarding “gay activities” at the location. The police claimed to have secured a number of pieces of evidence, among them sex toys, four condoms and a sword used for a dance performance. All participants were taken to the Bogor Police Headquarters where they were subjected to further examination, including health checks and HIV tests. As of Tuesday afternoon (24 June) the police have not named any of the people arrested. This is the latest such raid on so-called “gay sex parties” in Indonesia. Police detained nine people following a raid on a “gay sex party” at a hotel in South Jakarta on 24 May, while 56 individuals were detained for participating in “a gay party” in a raid on a different hotel in South Jakarta on 1 February. Those arrested in raids could face prison terms of up to 15 years for breaching Indonesia’s Pornography Law. The Pornography Law defines pornography broadly, encompassing material that contravenes norms of community morality. Ambiguously worded laws on pornography are often exploited to deliberately target LGBTI people, denying them the basic right to privacy and the right to enter into consensual relationships. Asia and the Pacific Discrimination Indonesia LGBTI Rights News Press Release South-East Asia and the Pacific News Related Content Country Indonesia News Southeast Asia: ASEAN Summit must address deteriorating crisis in Myanmar and ongoing scam compound activity News Global: How human rights defenders can pushback against their criminalization News Indonesia: Police beat protesters and unlawfully used tear gas to crush protests – new investigation News Indonesia: Military silences dissent with disinformation campaigns branding activists and journalists ‘foreign agents’ Recently added Yemen: One year on, Huthis must release arbitrarily detained lawyer Abdul Majid Sabra États-Unis. Amnesty International demande la suppression de l’ICE après avoir établi les violations généralisées des droits humains lors des opérations anti-immigration Europe: Sale of Israel Bonds finally ends in Europe 38 Global Civil Society Organizations file joint brief in US lawsuit challenging legality of Trump’s ICC sanctions Venezuela: Three months after the two earthquakes, a human rights-centred response remains absent Donate to protect human rights Together we can fight for human rights everywhere. Your donation can transform the lives of millions. Donate now About Us Contact Us How We’re Run Modern Slavery Act Statement Finances Resources Media Centre Human Rights Education Human Rights Courses Annual report archive Get involved Join Take Action Volunteer Latest News Campaigns Research Work With Us If you are talented and passionate about human rights then Amnesty International wants to hear from you. Jobs & Internships Privacy Policy Terms of Use Accessibility Cookie Statement Permissions Refunds of Donations © 2026 Amnesty International Follow us on: Facebook Instagram X TikTok Bluesky YouTube LinkedIn