Mocked, isolated and ignored: Trans people in Lithuania detail workplace harassment - LRT Menu Search Titulinis Naujienų srautas News 14 h ago Between three countries, a young Lithuanian finds her way home News 16 h ago Lithuania’s interior minister wants to restore warning shots for police and border guards News 1 d ago Young Lithuanian farmers compete in plowing contest News 1 d ago Can we still call Russia’s strategy against the EU hybrid? News 2 d ago Rare 17th-century wall paintings restored at Lithuania’s Siesikai Castle News 2 d ago Lithuania’s Interior Ministry reports cyberattack on archived information system News 2 d ago Lithuania and Philippines agree to coordinate labour migration News 2 d ago PM urges Lithuanian banks to prepare for payments during national mobilisation News 2 d ago Suspect in Alytus football player’s stabbing will not be charged due to insanity News 2 d ago EC says it is ‘carefully assessing’ Baltic request for €500 million in drone defences News 2 d ago Lithuania launches largest annual mobilisation drills, tests wartime supply system News 2 d ago Lithuania signs cooperation deal with US defence tech firm Mach Industries News 2 d ago LRT English Newsletter: America is back, for now News 3 d ago Lithuania to let Belarusians apply for residence permits in Armenia, Georgia News 3 d ago Denmark issues warning over ‘low but growing risk’ of limited Russian attack News 3 d ago Lithuanian PM suggests cutting public transport fares to offset fuel costs News 2025.05.24 12:00 Mocked, isolated and ignored: Trans people in Lithuania detail workplace harassment 19 DP Domantė Platūkytė, LRT.lt 2025.05.24 12:00 Office work (associative image) | V. Skaraitis / BNS Transgender people in Lithuania continue to face systemic discrimination in the labour market, including open ridicule, isolation and psychological abuse, according to experts who spoke at a parliamentary discussion marking the International Day Against Homophobia, Biphobia and Transphobia. “Eight times I was openly told they don’t accept people like me,” one transgender person shared. “Over the phone, they didn’t even avoid making jokes,” said another. “They stopped letting me consult at all. I was cut off from everything – total isolation.” The discussion, titled “Is It Safe for LGBTQ+ People in Lithuania? Insights and Perspectives,” was held at the Lithuanian parliament, Seimas, and included findings from recent research by the Office of the Equal Opportunities Ombudsperson. Quotes from trans people come from the research. “There’s little to celebrate when it comes to ensuring the rights of transgender people in Lithuania,” said Ieva Laugalytė, an expert at the office. She cited a European trans rights index that shows Lithuania meets just five out of 32 equality benchmarks. Ieva Laugalytė | Office of the Equal Opportunities Ombudsperson A recent national survey also found that only 22% of Lithuanians would feel comfortable working with a transgender colleague. That number drops to 19% when it comes to a transgender person in a leadership role, and even lower if such a person worked at their child’s school. “These legal gaps and public attitudes directly affect how trans people feel at work,” Laugalytė said. “One in three reported feeling discriminated against in the workplace or during job searches in the past year – yet 93% did not report the discrimination.” Psychological abuse and hostile workplaces The study found that trans people in Lithuania often face inappropriate and invasive questions during job interviews, including about their gender identity and possible medical transition. Interviewers would frequently refuse to use the person’s chosen name or pronouns, even when explicitly asked to. Many were denied jobs solely because they are transgender – often with no attempt to disguise the reason. “In Šiauliai, it was impossible to find a job, even with the right experience,” one person shared. “As soon as they heard I was trans, the interview was over.” Mažvydas Karalius, another expert from the ombudsperson’s office, added that early steps in a person’s gender transition are frequently met with psychological violence, gossip, bullying and social exclusion. Office work (associative image) | Israel Andrade / Unsplash “People we spoke with experienced abuse from supervisors, coworkers and even clients,” he said. “This often took the form of gender stereotyping, accusations that the person did not fit the image of a ‘real’ man or woman.” One individual, referred to as Viktorija, said she was abruptly removed from all work responsibilities after coming out as trans. “They didn’t let me do anything anymore. No consulting, no projects – complete isolation. I fell into a deep depression,” she said. Trans employees also reported being denied access to gender-appropriate uniforms, restrooms and even basic updates to their work profiles after legally changing their name or gender. Office work (associative image) | Marten Bjork/Unsplash “These experiences have a profound negative impact,” Laugalytė said. They lead to anxiety, burnout and block people from career advancement. Even with experience and skills, trans people are effectively shut out of leadership positions. “Discrimination in the workplace amplifies exclusion in every other part of life,” she added. LRT English Newsletter Every Friday morning. SUBSCRIBE Thanks for subscribing! Weekly newsletter every Friday # Society LRT has been certified according to the Journalism Trust Initiative Programme Newest, Most read Newest Most read 6 14 h ago Between three countries, a young Lithuanian finds her way home 6 16 h ago Lithuania’s interior minister wants to restore warning shots for police and border guards 1 d ago Young Lithuanian farmers compete in plowing contest 1 d ago Can we still call Russia’s strategy against the EU hybrid? 2 d ago Rare 17th-century wall paintings restored at Lithuania’s Siesikai Castle 2 d ago Lithuania’s Interior Ministry reports cyberattack on archived information system 2 d ago Lithuania and Philippines agree to coordinate labour migration 2 d ago PM urges Lithuanian banks to prepare for payments during national mobilisation 2 d ago Suspect in Alytus football player’s stabbing will not be charged due to insanity 5 2 d ago EC says it is ‘carefully assessing’ Baltic request for €500 million in drone defences 5 6 2026.09.27 10:00 Between three countries, a young Lithuanian finds her way home 6 2026.09.27 08:00 Lithuania’s interior minister wants to restore warning shots for police and border guards Links: About LRT Contacts PRESS RELEASES Rss Get app: News Privacy policy Change your consent FOLLOW US: Facebook Twitter Linkedin Youtube Lietuvos nacionalinis radijas ir televizija © 2026. All rights reserved