Eswatini | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Eswatini At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? No Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? No Legal Gender Recognition Possible? No LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? No Last Update: March 12, 2026 Common law in Eswatini criminalizes consensual same-sex intimacy. Trans people have no access to legal gender recognition, and only limited access to gender-affirming health care. Intersex people lack safeguards against nonconsensual medical interventions and experience social marginalization within a society that enforces binary understandings of sex. In April 2022, the High Court in Eswatini rejected a bid by the country’s leading LGBTIQ group, Eswatini Sexual and Gender Minorities (ESGM), for official recognition as an association. Upon appeal, the Supreme Court in June 2023 declared the Registrar’s decision void , ruling that “the approach undertaken by the Registrar in this regard does not meet the legal requirements contained in Section 33 of the Constitution,” which provides for the right to administrative justice. The Ministry for Commerce, Industry and Trade still refuses to register the organization because the NGO’s name and objectives allegedly “ seek to offend against the customary principles as preserved, ” claiming that “in our Swazi law and custom…a man and a woman shall start and maintain a love relationship.” As the organization has again had to approach the court, four UN Special Procedures mandate holders sent letters of communication to the government of Eswatini in November 2023, demanding an explanation of how the refusal to register ESGM complies with international human rights law. ESGM filed a new application in 2025 to address the state’s noncompliance with the judgment. In January 2026, education minister Owen Nxumalo threatened to expel students in same-sex relationships from school, provoking outrage from civil society groups . View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International