LGBTQ rights in Guinea-Bissau explained You are here Everything Explained.Today A-Z Contents L LG LGB LGBT LGBTQ LGBTQ LGBTQ R LGBTQ RI LGBTQ rights in Guinea-Bissau LGBTQ rights in Guinea-Bissau explained Location Header: Guinea-Bissau Legal Status: Legal since 1993 Gender Identity Expression: No Recognition Of Relationships: No recognition of same-sex unions Adoption: No Military: No Discrimination Protections: Limited protection based on sexual orientation Lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and queer (LGBTQ) people in Guinea-Bissau face legal challenges not experienced by non- LGBTQ residents. Same-sex sexual activity is legal in Guinea-Bissau , but same-sex couples and households headed by same-sex couples are not eligible for the same legal protections available to opposite-sex couples. Law regarding same-sex sexual activity The Penal Code which remained in force after the independence from Portugal was repealed in 1993 with the enactment of a new Code (Law-decree No. 4/93) which contains no provisions criminalising consensual same-sex sexual acts between adults. [1] In December 2008, Guinea-Bissau became one of 66 nations to sign the "United Nations Statement on Human Rights, Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity", which supports decriminalization of homosexuality and transgender identity. [2] Recognition of same-sex relationships The U.S. Department of State's 2011 Human Rights Report found that, "the law (in 2011) only recognized heterosexual married couples as entitled to larger government housing." [3] Adoption and family planning According to a website of the French government, single and married people are eligible to adopt children. The website does not say whether LGBTQ people are disqualified. [4] Discrimination protections Article 5 (Principle of equality) of Law against Domestic Violence (Law No. 6/2014) states that all victims, regardless of their sexual orientation, enjoy the fundamental rights inherent to human dignity, and are guaranteed equal opportunities to a life free from violence, as well as physical and mental health. [5] Living conditions Of 19 African countries surveyed in 2010, Guinea-Bissau was one of the most tolerant about homosexual behavior. Nine percent in Guinea-Bissau said that homosexual behavior was morally acceptable, with fifteen percent saying it was not an issue. [6] The U.S. Department of State's 2012 human rights report found that, [7] There are no laws that criminalize sexual orientation. Antidiscrimination laws do not apply to lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender individuals. There were no reported violent incidents or other human rights abuses targeting individuals based on their sexual orientation or identity. There was no official discrimination based on sexual orientation or gender identity in employment or access to education and health care. However, according to government guidelines for civil servants' housing allowances, only heterosexual married couples were entitled to family-size housing, while same-sex couples received the single person allotment. Social taboos against homosexuality sometimes restricted freedom to express sexual orientation, yet society was relatively tolerant of consensual same-sex conduct, according to a 2010 study by the Pew Research Center. In 2018, a local NGO director stated that there were some cases of violence targeting people based on their sexual orientation or gender identity and stressed that Guinea-Bissau lacks legal protections for LGBTI people. [8] See also Human rights in Africa LGBTQ rights in Africa Notes and References Book: Mendos, Lucas Ramón. State-Sponsored Homophobia 2019: Global Legislation Overview Update . ILGA. 2019. Geneva. 31. http://www.ukgaynews.org.uk/Archive/08/Dec/1802.htm "Tin's 'Pride' at UN Statement on Decriminalisation of Homosexuality", UKGayNews , 18 December 2008 Web site: 2011 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices: Guinea-Bissau , Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor, U.S. Department of State, p. 16 . Web site: Adopter en Equateur . Ministère de l'Europe et des Affaires. étrangères. France Diplomatie - Ministère de l'Europe et des Affaires étrangères. Web site: Lei contra a violência doméstica Lei 6/2014 . www.worldbank.org . 5 May 2025 . pt. Web site: "Islam and Christianity in Sub-Saharan Africa", Topline Survey Results, Pew Forum on Religion and Public Life, Pew Research Center, question 85, p. 276, 2010 . 25 December 2012 . https://web.archive.org/web/20130116085213/http://www.pewforum.org/uploadedFiles/Topics/Belief_and_Practices/sub-saharan-africa-topline.pdf . 16 January 2013 . dead . Web site: 2012 Country Reports on Human Rights Practices: Guinea-Bissau , Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor, U.S. Department of State, pp. 17–18 . Garrido, Rui, "Recent SOGI Developments in Angola and an Overview on Other African Lusophone Countries By Rui Garrido" in Mendos, Lucas Ramón, State-Sponsored Homophobia 2019 (Geneva; ILGA, March 2019), p. 91. Web site: LGBT Rights in Guinea-Bissau . This article is licensed under the GNU Free Documentation License . It uses material from the Wikipedia article " LGBTQ rights in Guinea-Bissau ". Except where otherwise indicated, Everything.Explained.Today is © Copyright 2009-2026, A B Cryer, All Rights Reserved. Cookie policy .