Lebanon: Police Shutter Pride Events | Human Rights Watch Skip to cookie privacy notice Skip to main content العربية 简中 繁中 English Français Deutsch 日本語 Português Русский Español More languages Search Donate Now Countries Topics Reports Videos & Photos Impact About Join Us Give Now Close Search Search Primary navigation Countries Africa All Africa African Union Angola Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Central African Republic Chad Côte d'Ivoire Democratic Republic of Congo Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini (formerly Swaziland) Ethiopia Gambia Ghana Guinea Kenya Liberia Malawi Mali Mauritius Mozambique Niger Nigeria Rwanda Senegal Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Americas All Americas Argentina Bolivia Brazil Canada Chile Colombia Costa Rica Cuba Dominican Republic Ecuador El Salvador Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Uruguay Venezuela Asia All Asia Afghanistan Australia Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China and Tibet Fiji India Indonesia Japan Laos Malaysia Maldives Myanmar (Burma) Nauru Nepal North Korea Pakistan Papua New Guinea Philippines Singapore South Korea Sri Lanka Taiwan Thailand Timor-Leste Vietnam Europe/Central Asia All Europe/Central Asia Albania Armenia Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czech Republic Denmark European Union France Georgia Germany Greece Holy See Hungary Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Latvia Lithuania Netherlands Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia Serbia/Kosovo Spain Sweden Switzerland Tajikistan Türkiye Turkmenistan Ukraine United Kingdom Uzbekistan Middle East/North Africa All Middle East/North Africa Algeria Bahrain Egypt Iran Iraq Israel/Palestine Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Libya Mauritania Morocco/Western Sahara Oman Qatar Saudi Arabia Syria Tunisia United Arab Emirates Yemen United States All United States Criminal Justice Democracy Economic Justice Immigrants’ Rights and Border Policy Racial Justice US Foreign Policy Topics Arms Cluster Munitions Killer Robots Landmines Explosive Weapons in Populated Areas Incendiary Weapons Children's Rights Education Attacks on Education Children Separated from Families Children and Armed Conflict Child Labor Youth Justice Migrant and Refugee Children Intersex Children Crisis and Conflict Disability Rights Shackling Economic Justice and Rights Corporate Accountability Poverty and Inequality Environment and Human Rights Climate Change Deforestation Fossil Fuels Free Speech Press Freedom Religious Freedom Health Sexual and Reproductive Health Detention Centers Disasters and Displaced Populations Environment and Health Health Care Access HIV/AIDS and Tuberculosis Palliative Care Attacks on Health LGBT Rights Refugees and Migrants Asylum Seekers Internally Displaced People Exploitation, Forced Labor & Trafficking Rights of Older People International Justice International Criminal Court Peace and Justice Sport and Human Rights Technology and Rights Digital Investigations Lab Terrorism / Counterterrorism CIA Activities Detention without Trial Edward Snowden Guantanamo Guantanamo - Military Commissions Targeted Killings and Drones Torture United Nations Human Rights Council Women's Rights Forced Marriage Gender Based Violence Domestic Workers Gender Equality Reproductive Rights Sexual Violence Labor Rights Sex Work Women and Armed Conflict Women’s Health Reports Video & Photos Impact Join Us Newsletters Our Committees Film Festival Legacies for Justice About About Us History Newsletters Careers People Board of Directors Advisory Committees Social Media Human Rights Education Partners Partner Resources Financials and Fundraising Policy Accessibility Contact Give Now Make a One-time Gift Give Monthly Gifts in Wills and Trusts Matching Gifts Partners for Justice Stock or Wire Transfer Give from Your IRA Donate Now Search Search English Choose your language Close العربية 简中 繁中 English Français Deutsch 日本語 Português Русский Español More Languages Donate Now Open the main menu Trending Russia-Ukraine War Israel/Palestine Trump Administration and Human Rights Crisis in the Middle East International Criminal Court Would you like to read this page in another language? Yes No, don't ask again ✕ Close Would you like to see a version of this page that loads faster by showing text only? Yes No, don't ask again ✕ Close Human Rights Watch Lebanon: Police Shutter Pride Events Print Donate Now May 18, 2018 12:00AM EDT | News Release Available In English العربية Lebanon: Police Shutter Pride Events Crackdown, Arrest of LGBT Activist Violates Rights Share this via Facebook Share this via Bluesky Share this via X Share this via WhatsApp Share this via Email More sharing options Share this via LinkedIn Share this via Reddit Share this via Telegram Share this via Printer Click to expand Image In this Sunday, Feb. 22, 2009 picture, Lebanese police stand guard as protesters carry banners during a sit-in for gays and lesbians in Beirut. In February, about two dozen gays and lesbians held a rare sit-in on Beirut's major intersection of Sodeco to protest what they called the beating of two gay men by two plainclothes police. Police officials denied the men were beaten by their officers. © 2009 AP Photo/Hussein Malla (Beirut) – The Lebanese Internal Security Forces arrested a prominent LGBT rights activist and pressured him to cancel Beirut Pride events, Human Rights Watch said today. The crackdown violates freedom of assembly and association and is a step backward in a country that has made progress toward respecting the rights of LGBT people. Beirut Pride , nine days of activities aimed at celebrating lesbian, gay, bisexual, and transgender identities, kicked off on May 12, 2018, with a brunch to honor families who support their LGBT children, and was scheduled to coincide with the International Day Against Homophobia and Transphobia (IDAHOT) on May 17. Scheduled events included a queer poetry reading, a karaoke night, a discussion of sexual health and HIV, and a legal literacy workshop. However, on May 14, Internal Security Forces raided an LGBT-themed theater reading and summoned Beirut Pride organizer Hadi Damien to the Hobeich police station, where he was held overnight. “Official interference with Beirut Pride is an outrageous step backward in a country where the judiciary and some politicians seem to be moving forward on LGBT rights,” said Lama Fakih , deputy Middle East director at Human Rights Watch. “There’s no justification for shutting down cultural events and health and legal workshops in the name of morality.” Damien said the Vice Squad interrogated him, told him that the public prosecutor had banned Pride week, and pressured him to sign a statement calling off all further Beirut Pride events or face charges of “incitement to immorality” and “breach of public morality.” Beirut Pride subsequently issued a statement suspending the events . The Internal Security Forces did not respond to a Human Rights Watch request for comment and it is not clear if the public prosecutor has issued a ban. Some activists said they plan to reschedule Pride events , while other events are continuing as planned in spite of the crackdown. “These violations against freedoms [give] us the energy to further advocate for freedoms,” the Arab Foundation for Freedoms and Equality (AFE), a group that works to advance LGBT and other human rights, said in a statement. Separate IDAHOT events organized by Helem took place on May 17 as scheduled. Helem’s director, Genwa Samhat, said that they often face pressure but are not canceling events and that the movement is ongoing. Lebanese activists have organized IDAHOT events since 2005 and many taken place without police interference. In 2017, the first year of public Beirut Pride events that received mainstream media coverage, extremist groups forced the closure of two events , with the complicity of Lebanese authorities, but other events went forward as planned. In May 2017, Lebanese authorities also ordered the Crowne Plaza Hotel in Beirut not to host a human rights workshop organized by AFE. Article 534 of Lebanon’s penal code punishes “any sexual intercourse contrary to the order of nature” with up to one year in prison, a provision that has been used frequently to prosecute people suspected of homosexuality. Human Rights Watch has documented reports of torture and ill-treatment by police and the military against people arrested under article 534. However, in four cases in the past 10 years, courts have ruled that this article cannot be used to prosecute consensual sex between people of the same sex, on the grounds that homosexual sex is not “unnatural.” As Lebanon is a state party to the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR), Lebanese authorities are required to uphold and protect freedom of assembly and association. Restrictions on such rights can only be imposed when they are not arbitrary (i.e. set out in clear domestic law), for a legitimate reason, proportionate, and do not discriminate on grounds prohibited in international law, which include sexual orientation and gender identity. Lebanon is home to a vibrant, creative, and diverse LGBT rights movement , with activist groups engaged in a wide range of activities. These include advocacy to change discriminatory laws and policies, legal aid, community education on sexual health and rights, training the media on how to report on LGBT issues in a non-stigmatizing way, sensitizing the public about LGBT rights through events and social media, celebrating talent through the arts, and building regional movements. Several Lebanese activists participated in a recent video campaign produced by Human Rights Watch and AFE that offers messages of support and encouragement to LGBT people in Arabic-speaking countries in the Middle East and North Africa. In Lebanon’s recent parliamentary elections, several prominent candidates publicly advocated the repeal of article 534 for the first time. “Lebanon’s new government has a lot of work to do after years of failure to meet citizens’ most basic rights,” Fakih said. “Trying to shut down LGBT pride events and interfering with freedom of expression does not augur well for meaningful change.” Your tax deductible gift can help stop human rights violations and save lives around the world. $50 $100 $250 $500 $1000 Other $ Donate Now Region / Country Middle East/North Africa Lebanon Topic LGBT Rights More Reading May 8, 2018 Commentary What the Brussels Conference Means for Refugees in Lebanon April 26, 2018 News Release Lebanon: Political Parties Shun Rights Issues Reports February 21, 2023 Report “All This Terror Because of a Photo” Digital Targeting and Its Offline Consequences for LGBT People in the Middle East and North Africa March 23, 2022 Report “Everyone Wants Me Dead” Killings, Abductions, Torture, and Sexual Violence Against LGBT People by Armed Groups in Iraq More Reading May 8, 2018 Commentary What the Brussels Conference Means for Refugees in Lebanon April 26, 2018 News Release Lebanon: Political Parties Shun Rights Issues Most Viewed January 15, 2026 Report Syria: Accountability Lacking for Sweida Abuses June 14, 2018 News Release Africa: Pregnant Girls, Young Mothers Barred from School September 8, 2016 News Release Nepal: Child Marriage Threatens Girls’ Futures May 17, 2021 Report “Years Don’t Wait for Them” September 27, 2026 Report Syria: Reconstruction Deals Lack Critical Rights Framework Share this via Facebook Share this via Bluesky Share this via X Share this via WhatsApp Share this via Email More sharing options Share this via LinkedIn Share this via Reddit Share this via Telegram Share this via Printer Protecting Rights, Saving Lives Human Rights Watch defends the rights of people in close to 100 countries worldwide, spotlighting abuses and bringing perpetrators to justice Donate Now Get updates on human rights issues from around the globe. Join our movement today. Enter an email address Leave blank Leave blank Leave blank Processing.. Thank you for signing up! An error occurred while subscribing your email address. Please try again. Get Updates On Rights Issues Worldwide Leave blank Leave blank Leave blank Sign Up Connect With Us BlueSky X Facebook YouTube Instagram LinkedIn TikTok Footer menu Contact Us Corrections Privacy Policy Permissions Site Map Child Safeguarding Text Version © 2026 Human Rights Watch Human Rights Watch | 350 Fifth Avenue, 34th Floor | New York, NY 10118-3299 USA | t 1.212.290.4700 Human Rights Watch is a 501(C)(3) nonprofit registered in the US under EIN: 13-2875808 Human Rights Watch