Saint Vincent and the Grenadines court to uphold ban on gay sex About Us Advertise Work with us Login Register Latest News View all UK US World Health Politics Sport Business Culture View all TV Film Celebrity Drag Theatre Music Gaming Lifestyle View all Beauty Careers Fashion Relationships Travel Shopping View all Deals Recommended Fashion & Beauty Tickets Video View all News & Politics Entertainment Lifestyle Discover Trans Awareness Week Drag Race Explainers The Queer Agenda Toggle menu Account Register Login Americas Saint Vincent and the Grenadines court rules to uphold ban on gay sex Feb 17 2024 Written by Ali Condon Share Save for later Comment Listen Saint Vincent and the Grenadines has ruled to uphold its ban on gay sex. (Getty Images) Gay sex will remain illegal in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines after the country’s High Court ruled to uphold its archaic laws criminalising same-sex relations. Queer News. Straight Up. The LGBTQ+ stories you don’t want to miss, delivered to your inbox daily. Email address required Must be valid email Register By registering you agree to our Privacy Policy Thanks for registering! You can update your email subscriptions at any time in the My profile section of your account. The ruling means that sections 146 and 148 of the Criminal Code 1988, remain intact. While the former carries a sentence of up to ten years for engaging in anal intercourse, the latter carries a five-year sentence for “gross indecency” with someone else of the same sex. Both sections had been challenged by gay men Kevin Vinc Johnson and Sean Macleish in 2019. The men had claimed that they had been forced to leave the Caribbean island country because of their sexuality. Their High Court battle was unsuccessful and their claims were ultimately rejected. Gay sex will remain illegal in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, much to the disappointment of LGBTQ+ citizens and advocates. (Canva) In his ruling High Court Justice Esco Henry determined that Saint Vincent and the Grenadines’ laws were “reasonably required” and were the “least drastic means to achieve” the country’s goal of reducing HIV cases. Just last year, the UN warned that anti-LGBTQ+ laws are, in fact, more likely to result in an increase in HIV cases. According to UNAids , HIV rates are five times higher in that criminalise gay sex than in countries that don’t. Dec 05 2022 26 LGBTQ+ couples we were rooting for but whose break-ups really, really hurt Commenting on this week’s disappointing ruling in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Cristian González Cabrera of Human Rights Watch tweeted: “Sad day for human rights in SVG. The ruling weakens the rule of law for everyone in this country.” 🚨Breaking High Court of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines has dismissed the cases challenging the constitutionality of the laws criminalizing gay sex. Sad day for human rights in SVG. The ruling weakens the rule of law for everyone in the country. — Cristian González Cabrera (@cristianfergo) February 16, 2024 “The criminalization of gay sex gives tacit state sanction to the discrimination and violence that LGBT people experience in their daily lives and compels many to look abroad to live freely and fulfill their dreams.” Sections 146 and 148 of the Criminal Code 1988 are rarely invoked, however, LGBTQ+ and human rights activists have warned that the laws have legitimised homophobic abuse and discrimination. In his ruling High Court Justice Esco Henry determined that Saint Vincent and the Grenadines’ laws the “least drastic means to achieve” the country’s goal of reducing HIV cases. (Getty Images) According to a 2023 report from Human Rights Watch , LGBTQ+ people are still subject to homophobic violence and discrimination in their daily lives, ranging from verbal and physical assault to workplace harassment, homelessness, and sexual violence. As part of the report, nearly every LGBTQ+ interviewee reported at least one recent incident of “physical or verbal abuse, threats, sexual violence, or harassment”, while every LGBTQ+ interviewee said they “wished to leave the country immediately or had envisioned their future abroad due, in part, to the homophobic or transphobic violence and discrimination in the country.” LGBTQ+ advocacy groups had hoped that Saint Vincent and the Grenadines would have followed in the footsteps of the other Caribbean countries that have decriminalised gay sex in the past decade; Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Trinidad and Tobago. According to Human Rights Watch , at least 67 countries around the world still uphold national laws criminalising gay sex between consenting adults. More: Caribbean Gay gay sex LGBT Please login or register to comment on this story. Related articles Europe Jul 30 Poland’s top court overturns plan to recognise EU same-sex marriages Law Jul 22 Gay rights advocate who had first same-sex wedding in Quebec dies aged 84 Africa Jul 08 Senegal amends constitution to ban same-sex marriage after landslide vote Asia Jun 22 Nepal Supreme Court rules in favour of equal marriage in huge win for LGBTQ+ rights Law Jun 11 Ed Davey criticised by brother on LinkedIn over Lib Dem trans rights challenge to single-sex guidance Latest News Previous Next Celebrity Sep 25 Trans influencer calls out Nikki Glaser for stand-up joke about what’s ‘in her pants’ Culture Sep 25 Trans pro wrestling trailblazer Gisele Shaw signs exclusive NWA contract Bisexual Sep 25 The Traitors star Freddie Fraser’s mum’s emotional response to his coming out Celebrity Sep 25 Lili Reinhart says Hollywood ‘too afraid’ to greenlight lesbian vampire project Celebrity Sep 25 Carly Rae Jepsen describes moment Heated Rivalry inspired her son’s name Celebrity Sep 25 John Green ‘heartbroken’ for trans Harry Potter fans as he talks JK Rowling Current Affairs Sep 25 JD Vance claims James Talarico has a “weird obsession with children in drag” News Sep 25 Susan Sarandon, Hannah Einbinder and Caleb Hearon detained outside UN after protesting Netanyahu What to buy now Previous Next Fashion Mar 27 Connor Ives and MAC team up to re-release the iconic ‘Protect The Dolls’ t-shirt Music Mar 12 The Pussycat Dolls confirm reunion with new single and tour – how to get tickets Music Jan 23 A full guide to the 2026 Harry Styles Together, Together tour including dates and presale info Shopping Nov 24 2025 Ten truly awesome Christmas gifts you can buy to support queer-owned businesses Trans Sep 09 2025 Lush creates ‘luxurious’ trans flag bath bomb to support trans charities Tickets Jun 25 2025 Dolly Parton announces mini Las Vegas residency after wrapping her last tour almost a decade ago Shopping May 15 2025 LEGO celebrates late gay icon Keith Haring with new art set: ‘Want this so bad’ Music Apr 18 2025 Primavera Sound’s most iconic queer performances, from Troye Sivan to Ethel Cain Exclusive Previous Next Exclusive Sep 11 Ania Magliano talks SNL UK season two and anti-LGBTQ voices in comedy: ‘We do edgy in the right way’ Exclusive Sep 11 Elliot Tuttle on Blue Film’s personal inspiration, rejection and taboo: ‘It’s about loneliness’ Exclusive Sep 09 OF star Andy Lee on love for gay fans, ‘poisonous’ creators and ‘harmful’ stunts: ‘Gay men lift me up every day’ Exclusive Sep 07 Real Housewives of London spill the tea: ‘She’d go to the opening of a packet of crisps’ Opinion Sep 04 Katseye in London: A showcase of real talent deserving of the deafening screams Exclusive Sep 02 Adrian Chiarella and Joe Bird on tackling conversion therapy in gay horror Leviticus Exclusive Aug 21 Sziget Festival drag and circus troupe want audiences to feel like family Exclusive Aug 20 Gay wrestler Anthony Bowens says Heated Rivalry shows authentic life of closeted athletes Register to save articles and more. It'll only take a minute and it's free. JOIN US TODAY! Already have an account? Log in here "/> Download the PinkNews app Award winning LGBTQ+ journalism About us Editorial Policy Contact us Advertise Work for us Terms and conditions Privacy policy Privacy manager Privacy Manager