Malaysia: Minister’s order to take action against the transgender community must be revoked | ICJ Donate to the ICJ By donating to the ICJ, you are actively participating in creating a just society. I want to help Home News & Advocacy Resource hub Current publications & practitioner tools Archive EU: Standards and Case-law on (alternatives to) detention of migrant children About The Commission Staff Work with us How we work Standard setting & normative development Research & fact finding Advocacy & strategic litigation Capacity strengthening Developing practitioner tools & guides Issues Accountability Business & human rights Civil, political, economic, social & cultural rights Digital rights & AI Disability rights Environmental rights Independence of judges & lawyers Sexual orientation & gender identity Women’s human rights United Nations Regions Africa Asia & Pacific Europe & Central Asia ICJ European Institutions Latin America Middle East & North Africa Impact Partners Sections & affiliates Networks Funders OpinioJuris website Donate $ Malaysia: Minister’s order to take action against the transgender community must be revoked 15 Jul 2020 | Advocacy , Multimedia items , News , Video clips The ICJ today condemned the order issued by Zulkifli Mohamad Al-Bakri, Malaysia’s Minister in charge of religious affairs, to the Federal Territories Islamic Religious Department (Jawi) to take action against the transgender community. The ICJ called on the Minister to rescind the order immediately and take steps to ensure non-discrimination and equal protection of all persons in Malaysia, including LGBTI persons. On 10 July 2020, Zulkifli Mohamad Al-Bakri announced in a social media post that he had given the Jawi authorities “full licence to carry out its enforcement actions” against transgender persons in Malaysia. He elaborated that his order would beyond arresting transgender persons but would also extend to providing them “religious education” so that they would “return to the right path”. “This unacceptable transphobic and homophobic attack from a government official highlights the societal prejudices and the lack of legal protections against discrimination faced by transgender persons in Malaysia,” said Ambiga Sreenavasan, a prominent Malaysian lawyer and Commissioner of the ICJ. “Instead of ensuring that the human rights and dignity of all persons are respected and protected, the Minister, through his statement, is going in the complete opposite direction by advocating state action against persons belonging to sexual orientation and gender identity minorities,” added Ambiga Sreenavasan. “The Minister is legitimizing harassment, discrimination and violence against transgender people, and increasing violations of their human rights.” Across the country in 13 states and the federal territories, a “male” who “poses” as a woman or wears the clothing of a “woman” may be subjected to criminal liability under state-level religious enactments. Consensual same-sex sexual relations are criminalized as “unnatural offences” in both secular civil law and religious state-level laws. These “offences” carry heavy penalties in the form of fines, imprisonment and corporal punishment in the form of caning, which constitutes impermissible cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment under international law and standards. The ICJ stressed that these laws served to institutionalize systemic discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation and gender identity and expression, while also creating barriers for LGBT people when seeking justice. They provide state authorities with expansive power to police gender identities, expressions and sexual orientations of people. The ICJ notes that experiences of severe stigma, marginalization, and violence committed by families, communities, and State actors lead to immense health risks and mental health disparities of transgender individuals. The ICJ is also deeply concerned about the Minister’s plan to require members of the transgender community to undergo religious conversion therapy. Numerous studies have shown how religious conversion therapy and related practices are causing real harm not only to transgender people, but also to lesbian, gay, and bisexual individuals. The ICJ calls on the Government of Malaysia to abide by its obligations under international law and follow through with its commitment to human rights, by ensuring that transgender people and all persons are legally protected against discrimination, and that they are able to live free from prejudice, harassment, and violations of their human rights. Contact Emerlynne Gil, ICJ Senior International Legal Adviser, e: emerlynne.gil(a)icj.org Background In 2019, the Human Rights Commission of Malaysia (SUHAKAM) released a report on Transgender Persons in Kuala Lumpur and Selangor. Many of the transgender people interviewed for this report said that they constantly face arbitrary arrests, discrimination in obtaining employment, and even discrimination in obtaining housing because of their gender identity. A large majority of those interviewed experienced violence because of their gender identity. Recent News HRC63: ICJ Raises Concern over Torture, Executions and Impunity in Libya 23 Sep 2026 HRC63: ICJ Calls for Renewal and Strengthening of the Venezuela Fact-Finding Mission 21 Sep 2026 Joint Statement: Attacks on the Rule of Law, Judicial Independence and Access to Justice in Zambia 17 Sep 2026 HRC63: ICJ Raises Concern over Widespread and Systematic Arbitrary Detention in Egypt 16 Sep 2026 ← Previous Next → Donate to the ICJ By donating to the ICJ, you are actively participating in creating a just society. I want to help Stay informed Sign up to for news updates, information on our advocacy, and upcoming events. Name This field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged. First name (Required) Email (Required) Organization Subscribe Address & Registration ICJ – International Commission of Jurists Postal address: Case Postale 1211 Geneva 1, Switzerland Physical address: Rue des Buis 3 1202 Geneva, Switzerland The ICJ is registered in the Canton of GE under CHE-107.751.792 Contact info (dot) icj (at) icj (dot) org Switzerland office: +41 (0)22 979 38 00 Thailand office: +66 261 984 77 Nepal office: AsiaPacific (at) icj (dot) org Belgium office: +32 2 734 84 46 ECA (at) icj (dot) org Tunisia office: +216 71 962 287 Africa (at) icj (dot) org Latinamerica (at) icj (dot) org Reporting unethical conduct by an ICJ person The ICJ expects a high standard of ethical conduct from all those who represent the organisation. If you have a concern or complaint, please use our dedicated Whistleblowing Channel. Create a report © 2025 ICJ. All Rights Reserved. Site by Pomegranite Privacy policy | Cookie policy Translate » < < < < Manage Cookie Consent 🍪 We use cookies on our website to improve your experience. By clicking "Accept all", you consent to the use of all the cookies. If you'd like to control which cookies we use, please visit "Cookie settings". To find out more, read our privacy policy and cookie policy . Functional Functional Always active The technical storage or access is strictly necessary for the legitimate purpose of enabling the use of a specific service explicitly requested by the subscriber or user, or for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission of a communication over an electronic communications network. Preferences Preferences The technical storage or access is necessary for the legitimate purpose of storing preferences that are not requested by the subscriber or user. Statistics Statistics The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for statistical purposes. The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for anonymous statistical purposes. Without a subpoena, voluntary compliance on the part of your Internet Service Provider, or additional records from a third party, information stored or retrieved for this purpose alone cannot usually be used to identify you. Marketing Marketing The technical storage or access is required to create user profiles to send advertising, or to track the user on a website or across several websites for similar marketing purposes. Manage options Manage services Manage {vendor_count} vendors Read more about these purposes Accept all Deny all Cookie settings Save cookie settings Cookie settings {title} {title} {title} Manage consent