Aruba - Gay and LGBT Friendly Caribbean Travel Destination ● Live Deals & Offers Blog News Nederlands Italiano English (US) Português English (UK) Español Deutsch Svenska Book Now Go Why Aruba Why Aruba Adventure Romance Culture Wellness Eat & Drink Families Weddings Aruba - Happiness that stays with you. A trip to sunny Aruba will leave you relaxed and refreshed for your journey home Discover Aruba Feel the Aruba Effect Things To Do Things To Do Beaches & coves On the water Natural Wonders Dining Nightlife Arts & Culture Sightseeing & Tours Shopping Wellbeing Sports & Golf Calendar of events Itineraries Deals & Offers Aruba offers the best vacation deals in the Caribbean. Check out today's top travel deals on accommodations, dining, entertainment, and more! See all deals & offers Deaxo's Local Shortcut Plan Your Visit Plan Your Visit Hotels & Resorts Vacation Rentals Timeshares All-inclusive Getting to Aruba Getting around Aruba Aruba by cruise Aruba vacations Tips for visitors Guest Services Deals & offers Want to visit the best vacation destination of the Carribean? Go to Aruba.com's Travel Guide and prepare your trip to the One Happy Island! See all deals & offers Book a trip Rooms Flights Activities Check-in Check-out Search Depart Return Select 1 Adult 2 Adults 3 Adults 4 Adults 5 Adults 6 Adults 7 Adults 8 Adults 9 Adults Passengers Origin City or Airport Search Arrival Departure Search Our Island Our Island History & culture Island facts Regions 360 map One Happy Island 70 square miles of happiness Our tiny island gem is nestled in the warm southern Caribbean with nearly 100 different nationalities happily living together. We welcome all visitors with sunny smiles and a warm embrace. Meet Our Locals An Introduction to Aruba You saved your first item To share or access this list from other devices, create a MyAruba login . Book Now ● Live Deals & Offers Blog News Nederlands Italiano English (US) Português English (UK) Español Deutsch Svenska Page not translated × The exact page you are looking for has not been translated. Continue anyway Stay on this page Confirm Selection This site uses cookies. Some are essential while others improve your browsing experience and allow us to advertise. For more info visit the privacy policy page. Allow inessential cookies for: Analytics (site-wide) Advertisement (internet-wide) Personalization (site-wide) Your preferences have been updated. LGBT Vacations to Aruba Share Here on Aruba, we have become a destination of choice—often a repeat destination—for LGBT travelers. Feeling safe, secure, and welcome is the foundation to an ideal LGBT-friendly travel destination. Frequent Aruba visitor Michael Marsh, the president/CEO of Toledo Fair Housing Center in Ohio, doesn’t necessarily seek out destinations with dedicated infrastructure for the LGBT community. “I have been traveling to Aruba for almost 20 years now—it is the perfect destination for anyone who is looking for a relaxing getaway.” Michael credits the warm hospitality and the innate friendly nature of the locals for creating a welcoming environment for all travelers. “I don't recall ever encountering any kind of mistreatment or discrimination based on sexual orientation in all of my visits to the island,” he shares. Michael ponders that perhaps it’s partly because of the tolerant and open-minded nature that has evolved from the Dutch influence on the island that has set the tone for a nation that welcomes all walks of life. “The most important highlight about Aruba is that it is welcoming to all people and offers something for all types of interests--beach and water sports, excursions to unsettled areas of the island, a culture that embraces art and music, world-class shopping and dining, gambling, and nightlife.” Michael adds that “Aruba offers world-class accommodations through stellar hospitality brands, as well as retail luxury brands available on the island, like Cartier, Gucci, and Louis Vuitton. The restaurants are also enticing—offering topnotch fine dining, trendy cafés, and cool local eateries.” Michael concludes, “Personally, I don't look for LGBT destinations in particular. I just like to visit places that have the types of things I enjoy, like good restaurants, five-star accommodations, beaches, and shopping. Overall, though, it all comes back to the people of Aruba—their warmth is matched only by the tropical sunshine!” Romantic Honeymoon Getaway Aruba: One Happy Island Aruba’s moniker is “one happy island” — and the Caribbean island more than lives up to that name. Learn More Aruba encourages everyone to create lifelong memories, and the One happy island prides itself on welcoming all races, religions, and diverse lifestyles. Aruba's a great destination for LGBT vacations because of the Aruban people's cosmopolitan worldview; which is somewhat unique among the Caribbean islands. This can be traced to the Dutch roots that are prominent in Aruba. In fact, the Netherlands was the first country to legalize gay marriage in 2001! The Aruban people's progressive mindset makes it entirely safe for our LGBT guests to not only walk around Aruba hand-in-hand but also to truly enjoy their well-earned vacations entirely worry-free. Many hotels in Aruba are Travel Alternative’s Group (TAG) approved as well, meaning that their staff is well-trained in accepting diversity and that these resorts even employ members of the LGBT community. And Aruba's beach-front resorts truly do provide an environment that is unmatched by any other Caribbean island. Just as same-sex wedding ceremonies have gained popularity in Aruba, gay nightlife in Aruba is growing as well. In fact, gay bars and clubs can be found throughout the capital city of Oranjestad. So what are you waiting for? Plan a vacation to Aruba and experience the warm vibes and cool trade winds of the One happy island for yourself! Dining in Aruba From traditional Dutch to Asian, African, and Spanish, dining options are as diverse and welcoming as our people. Explore The Aruban Nightlife Wellness vacation in Aruba Aruba Hotels & Resorts Aruba's Beaches & Coves More About LGBT in Aruba News Aruba Votes for LGBT Civil Union as first Island in the Caribbean Aruba Votes for LGBT Civil Union as first Island in the Caribbean Read More News T.H. Palm & Company Celebrates 3rd Annual Rainbow Night T.H. Palm & Company Celebrates 3rd Annual Rainbow Night Read More Featured in Aruba Romance Renaissance Wind Creek Aruba Resort Learn More Romance Renaissance Island Learn More Families The Village Learn More Families Eagle Beach Learn More Eat & Drink The Kitchen Table Learn More Start Booking Your Trip To Aruba Rooms Flights Activities Deals & Offers Check-in Check-out Search Depart Return Select 1 Adult 2 Adults 3 Adults 4 Adults 5 Adults 6 Adults 7 Adults 8 Adults 9 Adults Passengers Origin City or Airport Search Arrival Departure Search From To Search We’re just getting started with the amazing effects Aruba has to offer. Dig into your trip details below to unlock a Caribbean experience that will fill you with sunshine and send you home with a happy afterglow that never fades. Plan Your Effect TRIP PLANNER myAruba planner Save your favorite places and experiences to a custom itinerary you can manage while you're visiting the island: Start Planning ? I'm looking for: ✦ ✦ ✦ Travel Inspiration Practical Information Sign-up to find your Voluntourism Experience Email me Stay up to date × Compelete this form to receive emails from the Aruba Tourism Authority. First Name This is a required field. Last Name This is a required field. Email Address This is a required field. Please enter a valid email address. Select Your Country Afghanistan Albania Algeria American Samoa Andorra Angola Anguilla Antarctica Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Aruba Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas (the) Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bermuda Bhutan Bolivia (Plurinational State of) Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Bouvet Island Brazil British Indian Ocean Territory (the) Brunei Darussalam Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cabo Verde Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cayman Islands (the) Central African Republic (the) Chad Chile China Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands (the) Colombia Comoros (the) Congo (the Democratic Republic of the) Congo (the) Cook Islands (the) Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Curaçao Cyprus Czechia Côte d'Ivoire Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic (the) Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Eswatini Ethiopia Falkland Islands (the) [Malvinas] Faroe Islands (the) Fiji Finland France French Guiana French Polynesia French Southern Territories (the) Gabon Gambia (the) Georgia Germany Ghana Gibraltar Greece Greenland Grenada Guadeloupe Guam Guatemala Guernsey Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Heard Island and McDonald Islands Holy See (the) Honduras Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran (Islamic Republic of) Iraq Ireland Isle of Man Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Jersey Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Korea (the Democratic People's Republic of) Korea (the Republic of) Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Lao People's Democratic Republic (the) Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Macao Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands (the) Martinique Mauritania Mauritius Mayotte Mexico Micronesia (Federated States of) Moldova (the Republic of) Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Montserrat Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands (the) New Caledonia New Zealand Nicaragua Niger (the) Nigeria Niue Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands (the) Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Palestine, State of Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines (the) Pitcairn Poland Portugal Puerto Rico Qatar Republic of North Macedonia Romania Russian Federation (the) Rwanda Réunion Saint Barthélemy Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Martin (French part) Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Samoa San Marino Sao Tome and Principe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Sint Maarten (Dutch part) Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands South Sudan Spain Sri Lanka Sudan (the) Suriname Svalbard and Jan Mayen Sweden Switzerland Syrian Arab Republic Taiwan (Province of China) Tajikistan Tanzania, United Republic of Thailand Timor-Leste Togo Tokelau Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Turks and Caicos Islands (the) Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates (the) United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland (the) United States Minor Outlying Islands (the) United States of America (the) Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) Viet Nam Virgin Islands (British) Virgin Islands (U.S.) Wallis and Futuna Western Sahara Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe Åland Islands Select Your Country This is a required field. I would like to receive email communications from the Aruba Tourism Authority. This is sent to the address I have notified and informs about the island and current travel offers for Aruba. The e-mail address you provided will not be passed on to third parties. The consent can be revoked at any time by sending an e-mail to support@aruba.com or by clicking on the link to unsubscribe at the bottom of the email. I would like to receive email communications from the Aruba Tourism Authority. This is sent to the address I have notified and informs about the island and current travel offers for Aruba. The e-mail address you provided will not be passed on to third parties. The consent can be revoked at any time by sending an e-mail to support@aruba.com or by clicking on the link to unsubscribe at the bottom of the email. This is a required field. You have successfully subscribed! Privacy policy Subscribe Ok Why Aruba Adventure Romance Culture Wellness Eat & Drink Families Weddings Things To Do Beaches & coves On the water Natural Wonders Dining Nightlife Arts & Culture Sightseeing & Tours Shopping Wellbeing Sports & Golf Itineraries Calendar of events Plan Your Visit Hotels & Resorts Vacation Rentals Timeshares All-inclusive Getting to Aruba Getting around Aruba Aruba by cruise Aruba vacations Tips for visitors Guest Services Our Island History & culture Island facts Regions 360 map Follow Us Contact Us Email: support@aruba.com Phone: 1-800-862-7822 Aruba Convention Bureau Travel Agents Organizations News Media Local Partners Stay Up To Date Stay Up To Date First Name This is a required field. Last Name This is a required field. Email Address This is a required field. Please enter a valid email address. Select Your Country Afghanistan Albania Algeria American Samoa Andorra Angola Anguilla Antarctica Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Aruba Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas (the) Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bermuda Bhutan Bolivia (Plurinational State of) Bonaire, Sint Eustatius and Saba Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Bouvet Island Brazil British Indian Ocean Territory (the) Brunei Darussalam Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cabo Verde Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cayman Islands (the) Central African Republic (the) Chad Chile China Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands (the) Colombia Comoros (the) Congo (the Democratic Republic of the) Congo (the) Cook Islands (the) Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Curaçao Cyprus Czechia Côte d'Ivoire Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic (the) Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Eswatini Ethiopia Falkland Islands (the) [Malvinas] Faroe Islands (the) Fiji Finland France French Guiana French Polynesia French Southern Territories (the) Gabon Gambia (the) Georgia Germany Ghana Gibraltar Greece Greenland Grenada Guadeloupe Guam Guatemala Guernsey Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Heard Island and McDonald Islands Holy See (the) Honduras Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran (Islamic Republic of) Iraq Ireland Isle of Man Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Jersey Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Korea (the Democratic People's Republic of) Korea (the Republic of) Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Lao People's Democratic Republic (the) Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Macao Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands (the) Martinique Mauritania Mauritius Mayotte Mexico Micronesia (Federated States of) Moldova (the Republic of) Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Montserrat Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands (the) New Caledonia New Zealand Nicaragua Niger (the) Nigeria Niue Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands (the) Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Palestine, State of Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines (the) Pitcairn Poland Portugal Puerto Rico Qatar Republic of North Macedonia Romania Russian Federation (the) Rwanda Réunion Saint Barthélemy Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Martin (French part) Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Samoa San Marino Sao Tome and Principe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Sint Maarten (Dutch part) Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands South Sudan Spain Sri Lanka Sudan (the) Suriname Svalbard and Jan Mayen Sweden Switzerland Syrian Arab Republic Taiwan (Province of China) Tajikistan Tanzania, United Republic of Thailand Timor-Leste Togo Tokelau Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Turks and Caicos Islands (the) Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates (the) United Kingdom United States Minor Outlying Islands (the) United States of America (the) Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) Viet Nam Virgin Islands (British) Virgin Islands (U.S.) Wallis and Futuna Western Sahara Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe Åland Islands Select Your Country This is a required field. I would like to receive the Canadian One Happy Aruba Newsletter from the Aruba Tourism Authority. This is sent once a month by e-mail to the address I have notified and informs about the island and current travel offers for Aruba. The e-mail address you provided will not be passed on to third parties. The consent can be revoked at any time by sending an e-mail to support@aruba.com or by clicking on the link to unsubscribe at the bottom of the newsletter. I would like to receive the German One Happy Aruba Newsletter from the Aruba Tourism Authority. This is sent once a month by e-mail to the address I have notified and informs about the island and current travel offers for Aruba. The e-mail address you provided will not be passed on to third parties. The consent can be revoked at any time by sending an e-mail to support@aruba.com or by clicking on the link to unsubscribe at the bottom of the newsletter. This is a required field. Subscribe You have successfully subscribed! ©2026 Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Your browser doesn't support HTML5 video tag Your browser doesn't support HTML5 video tag Your browser doesn't support HTML5 video tag