Ireland | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Ireland At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Legal Gender Recognition Possible? Yes LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? Yes Last Update: March 12, 2026 Ireland has made advances in LGBTIQ equality in recent years. Ireland legalized same-sex marriage in 2015 by popular vote. Same-sex couples may jointly adopt and are generally treated equally to different-sex couples for adoption and fostering under the Children and Family Relationships Act 2015 and later amendments. Transgender people may change their legal gender markers based on self-determination . Ireland’s Equality Acts ban discrimination based on “gender, marital status, family status, age, disability, sexual orientation, race, religion, and membership of the Traveller community,” but do not explicitly cover gender identity, gender expression, and sex characteristics. In at least one case, antidiscrimination laws have been interpreted to protect transgender people under the “gender” ground, although gender identity is not explicitly mentioned. Intersex people remain one of the least protected groups among sexual and gender minorities in Ireland. Reports in 2025 note that medically unnecessary, nonconsensual surgeries on intersex children are still not explicitly prohibited in Irish law. Ireland scores zero points on intersex bodily integrity in the 2025 ILGA‑Europe Rainbow Map , reflecting the absence of specific legal safeguards and data collection for intersex people. As public acceptance grows, the 2024 LGBTIQ Survey of the European Union Fundamental Rights Agency showed that 58 percent of LGBTIQ respondents were fairly or very open about being LGBTIQ in the country, an increase from the previous survey and higher than the EU average of 51 percent. At the same time, anti-LGBTIQ violence and discrimination remain serious issues. LGBTIQ youth continue to face toxic comments, abuse, and online harassment. A study released in March 2023 found that a staggering 87 percent of young LGBTQ+ people have experienced hate and harassment online. The police’s annual hate crime statistics show that sexual orientation is an element in a significant percentage of hate crimes, although the number of recorded incidents related to sexual orientation fell from 109 to 70 between 2023 and 2024. Trans organizations report ongoing issues with access to timely, respectful health care and social services. During Ireland’s 2024 elections , a coalition of LGBTIQ groups issued a community manifesto calling on political candidates to commit to respecting LGBTIQ people’s human rights. The three largest political parties generally supported measures such as antibullying protections and legislation exonerating men criminalized for same-sex intimacy. However, their platforms did not address demands for specific legal protections for trans, nonbinary, and intersex individuals and reforms to the Equality Acts. In December 2024, new hate crime legislation came into force that enforces stricter penalties for crimes motivated by an individual’s protected characteristics, including gender identity and sexual orientation. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International