Nigeria: 2 men stripped, paraded for alleged sex Now Reading Nigeria: 2 men stripped, paraded for alleged sex Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate Nigeria: 2 men stripped, paraded for alleged sex by Colin Stewart April 26, 2018 Colin Stewart Colin Stewart is a 45-year journalism veteran living in Southern… Read Next Protest over Bangladeshi failure to solve 2016 murders Two Nigerian men in Imo State were stripped naked, beaten and paraded on the street after being accused of having gay sex. Two of the victims who was paraded through the streets. The incident happened early today in the Isiala Mbano area of Imo State. The victim’s identities are unknown. A scornful crowd marched the two victims through the streets. The victims would have numbered three men, except that one managed to escape just after the mob arrived. The two men who were left behind were subjected to public humiliation and made to walk naked on the street with palm leaves tied around their necks and waist. The abusive mob followed them, as did a crowd of people taking photos and shouting at them. It is believed that the homophobic mob tied the leaves around the men to portray them as abominations. An inquiry into the incident by NoStringsNG revealed that the victims were arrested by police and now may need legal support. See Also Cameroon police arrest No. 1 suspect in murder of popular gay man Incidents like this are common in Nigeria and seem to be on the rise of late. Encouraged by the country’s anti-gay law, enacted in 2014, homophobic criminals target unsuspecting gay people, who become victims of blackmail, extortion, kidnap, rape etc. Recently, a similar incident occurred in Anambra State , where an innocent pastor was seized by a mob, beaten, stripped, and subjected to online abuse by criminals who forced him to acknowledge that he is gay. A victim mockingly dressed in palm leaves. Related articles: Gay pastor in Nigeria stripped naked by homophobes ( April 2018, 76crimes.com) Activist: Stop abusive anti-LGBTQ videos in Nigeria ( August 2017, 76crimes.com) Nigerian man beaten after he arrives wearing female clothes (July 2017, 76crimes.com) Nigerian’s Bible research leads to anti-gay death threat (July 2017, 76crimes.com) Petition: Stop Nigerian comedian from promoting hate crimes against gays (January 2017, 76crimes.com) 152 violations of LGBTQI Nigerians’ human rights in 2016 (January 2017, 76crimes.com) 3 of every 4 LGBT Nigerians have been abused, survey says (January 2017, 76crimes.com) Nigerian LGBT website fights blackmail (November 2016, 76crimes.com) Nigeria: Man kidnapped by blackmailers who claim he’s gay (July 2016, NoStringsNG) Nigerian police extort money from man they claim is gay (June 2016, NoStringsNG) Nigerian mob demands death for gay prisoners (January 2014, 76crimes.com) Colin Stewart April 26, 2018 The Latest Posts Turkey’s anti-LGBT crackdown expands; activists fight back Proposed Ukraine law would expand ban on anti-LGBTQ discrimination A third of LGBTQ groups say 2025’s drastic cuts will force them to close Bangladesh activists launch petition to end anti-LGBTQ discrimination Uganda’s ‘Not Free’ rating partly due to anti-LGBT laws Appeal to Indonesia to stop listing ‘LGBTQ culture’ as a national threat LGBTI+ rights activists in Turkey seek international support during crackdown Analysis: Cameroon’s anti-gay raids violated Cameroon’s own rules Ghana’s £10m deal is dead; gay fans won’t be lured to homophobic nation Turkey: 162 targeted in anti-LGBTQ+ raids Cameroon: 5 gay-rights arrests; 7 days in jail and counting Previous Article Protest over Bangladeshi failure to solve 2016 murders Next Article View Comment (1) Leave a Reply Cancel reply Your email address will not be published. Name * E-mail * Website Notify me of new posts by email. Δ Related Posts How Nigeria’s anti-gay law fuels violence against the LGBTQ community Messed-up map shows U.S. regime doesn’t know or care where it’s killing millions Nigerian college expels two students for homosexual activity Double your donation to set free innocent LGBT prisoners Please help free Chidi, an innocent victim of a Nigerian blackmailer Slow pace of donations leaves 5 innocent LGBTI prisoners stuck in cells About The Erasing 76 Crimes news site covers the human toll of 66+ countries’ anti-gay laws and the struggle to repeal them. Member Members of the African Human Rights Media Network publish news articles and other media that educate readers about sexual minorities’ struggle for recognition of their human rights. Partner The St. Paul’s Foundation for International Reconciliation promotes LGBTQ+ rights through fact-based advocacy journalism and community projects. (California charity 80-0647355) © 2026 Erasing 76crimes. All rights reserved. Scroll To Top Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate Facebook Twitter Instagram Discover more from Erasing 76 Crimes Subscribe now to keep reading and get access to the full archive. Type your email… Subscribe Continue reading PRESS ESC TO CLOSE