Burkina Faso's military junta to ban homosexual acts Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Home News US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business World of Business Technology of Business NYSE Opening Bell Technology Artificial Intelligence Intelligence Revolution AI v the Mind Tech Now Health Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList To the Ends of the Earth Earth Science Natural Wonders Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcast Categories Radio Audio FAQs Video BBC Maestro Discover the World Live Live News Live Sport Site search Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters Burkina Faso's military junta to ban homosexual acts 11 July 2024 Share Save Add as preferred on Google Richard Kagoe BBC News Reuters Capt Ibrahim Traoré's regime is spearheading an overhaul of marriage laws Burkina Faso's military junta has announced a ban on homosexual acts, making it the latest African state to crack down on same-sex relations despite strong opposition from Western powers. Homosexuality was frowned upon in the socially conservative West African state, but it was never outlawed. Justice Minister Edasso Rodrigue Bayala said the junta's cabinet had now approved legislation to make it a punishable offence, but he did not give further details. The military seized power in Burkina Faso in 2022, and has pivoted towards Russia after drastically reducing ties with former colonial power, France. Homosexual acts were decriminalised in Russia in 1993, but President Vladimir Putin's government has been cracking down on the LGBTQ community , including banning what it calls "propaganda of non-traditional sexual relations". The doctor forced to fight jihadists in Burkina Faso Nigeria-EU deal sparks false claims over LGBT rights The Nigerian queer parties that offer liberation Burkina Faso's decision to outlaw homosexual relations is part of an overhaul of its marriage laws. The new legislation, which still needs to be passed by the military-controlled parliament and signed off by junta leader Ibrahim Traoré, only recognises religious and customary marriages. "Henceforth homosexuality and associated practices will be punished by the law," the justice minister was quoted by AFP news agency as saying. Capt Traoré took power in September 2022 after overthrowing another military ruler, Lt Col Paul-Henri Damiba, accusing him of failing to quell an Islamist insurgency that has gripped Burkina Faso since 2015. Burkina Faso was among 22 out of 54 African states where same-sex relations were not criminalised. Unlike in many former British colonies, it did not inherit anti-homosexuality laws after independence from France in 1960. Muslims make up around 64% of Burkina Faso's population and Christians 26%. The remaining 10% of people follow traditional religions or have no faith. Many African states have been taking a tougher stand against the LGBTQ community in recent years. Uganda is among those that have adopted legislation recently to further crack down on the community, despite strong condemnation from local rights groups and Western powers. In May, its Constitutional Court upheld a tough new anti-gay law that allows for the death penalty to be imposed for “aggravated homosexuality”, which includes having gay sex with someone below the age of 18 or where someone is infected with a life-long illness such as HIV. Activists said they would appeal against the ruling. The World Bank has halted new loans to President Yoweri Museveni's government while the US has stopped giving Ugandan goods preferential access to its markets, following the adoption of the legislation last year. Mr Museveni defended the legislation as preserving traditional family values, and said Uganda would not allow the West to dictate to it. The daughter of Cameroon's president drew mixed reaction after she came out as a lesbian last week. Brenda Biya, who lives abroad, said she hoped that her coming out would help change the law banning same-sex relations in the country. Cameroon has been ruled with an iron-hand by her 91-year-old father, Paul Biya, since 1982. In Ghana, parliament passed a tough new bill in February that imposes a prison sentence of up to three years for anyone convicted of identifying as LGBTQ+. However, President Nana Akufo-Addo has not signed it into law, saying he will wait for the courts to rule on its constitutionality. The finance ministry has warned him that if the bill became law, Ghana could lose $3.8bn (£3bn) in World Bank funding over the next five to six years. Ghana is suffering a major economic crisis and received a bailout from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) last year. You may also be interested in: PODCAST: How has Brenda Biya’s kiss affected Cameroon? Ghana's LGBT terror: 'We live in fear of snitches' Why are African countries passing anti-LGBT laws? Getty Images/BBC Go to BBCAfrica.com for more news from the African continent. Follow us on Twitter @BBCAfrica , on Facebook at BBC Africa or on Instagram at bbcafrica BBC Africa podcasts Africa Daily Focus on Africa LGBT rights in Africa Burkina Faso Africa Related Ghana's anti-LGBTQ+ bill to be scrutinised before approval, president says Ghana's parliament passes anti-LGBTQ+ bill Senegal president signs tough new anti-LGBT law doubling jail terms More from the BBC 7 hrs ago Two mass shootings in South Africa leave 27 dead The two attacks hours apart come as the country struggles to stop high levels of gang-related armed violence. 7 hrs ago 2 days ago Are Ethiopians marching back to war in Tigray? Exploring the issues behind the escalation of tensions between the TPLF and the national army. 2 days ago 2 days ago Africa's richest man helps fund $660m fuel pipeline between Ethiopia and Djibouti The pipeline would strengthen energy security in landlocked Ethiopia, while creating jobs at Djibouti's port. 2 days ago 3 days ago Ethiopia's army says it has repelled attacks in first comment on fresh fighting The military says its soldiers inflicted casualties as fears grow of a resumption of a full-blown civil war. 3 days ago 3 days ago Man killed by insurgents gave up helicopter place Mawer had worked for construction firm RA International in the African country for 18 months. 3 days ago British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages The BBC is in multiple languages Read the BBC In your own language BBC News Brasil BBC News Mundo (Spanish) BBC News မြန်မာ (Burmese) BBC News 中文 (Chinese) BBC News Indonesia BBC News 코리아 (Korean) BBC News ไทย (Thai) BBC News Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese) BBC News Azərbaycanca (Azeri) BBC News Magyarul (Hungarian) BBC News Кыргыз Кызматы (Kyrgyz) BBC News Polska (Polish) BBC News România (Romanian) BBC News Русская служба (Russian) BBC News na srpskom (Serbian) BBC News Україна (Ukrainian) BBC News O'zbek (Uzbek) BBC News عربي (Arabic) BBC News فارسی (Persian) BBC News Türkçe (Turkish) BBC News বাংলা (Bengali) BBC News دری (Dari) BBC News ગુજરાતી (Gujarati) BBC News हिन्दी (Hindi) BBC News मराठी (Marathi) BBC News नेपाली (Nepali) BBC News සිංහල (Sinhala) BBC News ਪੰਜਾਬੀ (Punjabi) BBC News Afaan Oromoo BBC News አማርኛ (Amharic) BBC News Afrique (French) BBC News Hausa BBC News Gaelic NAIDHEACHDAN BBC News Ìgbò BBC News Japanese 日本語 BBC News Gahuza BBC News Pidgin BBC News Somali BBC News Swahili BBC News தமிழ் (Tamil) BBC News తెలుగు (Telugu) BBC News ትግርኛ (Tigrinya) BBC News اردو (Urdu) BBC News Yorùbá BBC News World Service Follow BBC on: Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Do not share or sell my info Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us BBC.com Help & FAQs Content Index Set Preferred Source Copyright 2026 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.