No Longer Safe: Extremism Upends Trans Lives in Bangladesh Skip to main content Donate newsletter Topics Environment Health Regions Africa Americas Asia Special Coverage Shifting Democracies A Global Crisis: The Cost of USAID's Abrupt Shutdown Style Guide About Global Press Corrections Shifting Democracies Reporting Fellowship Newsletters Support Global Press Bangladesh With conservatism on the rise, the capital’s third-gender and trans people retreat from public life, erasing the identities they once fought to display. By Fabeha Monir Reporting Fellow Fabeha Monir, GPJ Bangladesh Babuni, 33, a prominent community leader, now lives in isolation after surviving a mob attack on a safe house two months earlier. “I escaped only with my life,” she says. DHAKA, BANGLADESH — Early this year, dozens of men stormed the gate of a safe house for third-gender people. Among the attackers were people who used to sympathize with the community, says Babuni, who was in the safe house at the time. They threw stones and broke windows. Babuni took important items from the home’s office — crests, certificates and photographs — and threw them in the nearest river. Then, she went into hiding. It wasn’t always like this. Everything changed after the Monsoon Revolution, Babuni says. Since 2013, Bangladesh has allowed third-gender people to officially identify as such. Some even entered politics; a rural town elected a transgender woman as mayor in 2021. But the revolution in 2024, led by young people who demanded widespread political change, opened avenues for hardline conservatives to gain ground. Now, conservative Islamist groups threaten minorities — specifically LGBTQ+ people. Naziya, a trans woman, says she welcomed political change, including the ouster of former Prime Minister Sheikh Hasina and the new interim government. But when she saw that LGBTQ+ people were increasingly at risk, she stopped identifying publicly as a woman. She cut her hair. With a growing beard, she doesn’t look in mirrors. She’s been attacked, she says, and has stopped going to university. Sanjana Mehebuba, a trans woman, provides legal support for her community. She says third-gender people hesitate to report attacks against them to police. They fear being targeted. “For many,” she says, “a simple complaint poses a life risk.” Fabeha Monir, GPJ Bangladesh Babuni visits a safe house — one of many that have become targets. “I am staying in a different shelter away from my community for fear of causing trouble to them,” she says. Fabeha Monir, GPJ Bangladesh Trans women Ramisa Chowdhury, right, and Naziya spend time together at a safe house in Dhaka. Naziya, who once embraced her identity, has cut her hair and stopped attending university after being attacked on her commute. “I no longer wish to be identified as a woman due to fear for my life,” she says. Fabeha Monir, GPJ Bangladesh A framed photo of Babuni in her early 20s hangs in her temporary shelter. Once an outspoken activist performing in schools and cultural events, she now hides her identity. Fabeha Monir, GPJ Bangladesh Babuni greets a neighbor in the informal settlement where she now lives. The community “is supportive of the third gender and provides shelter to me in this crisis,” she says. Fabeha Monir, GPJ Bangladesh Babuni and Ramisa Chowdhury spend time together in one of the remaining safe houses for the third-gender community in Dhaka. These spaces once hosted cultural events, skill-building sessions and drama rehearsals. Editorial Team Reporter: Fabeha Monir Editor: Krista Karch Fact-Checker: Sarah Jane Foster Copy Editor: Allison Braden Photo Editor: Juan Pablo Ampudia Fabeha Monir is a Shifting Democracies Fellow at Global Press Journal, based in Dhaka, Bangladesh. She is renowned for her compelling storytelling that intertwines photography, film and investigative reporting. Her work delves into pressing issues such as gender-based violence, labor rights, climate change and forced migration, amplifying the experiences of people in communities across South Asia. Her work has been featured in prominent news outlets, including The New York Times, Bloomberg News, The Wall Street Journal and The Washington Post. In 2024, Monir co-directed the short documentary The Taste of Honey, which garnered the Best Short Film Award at the Terni Film Festival in Italy and was officially selected for the Africa International Human Rights Film Festival. The film explores the lives of honey collectors in the Sundarbans, highlighting the intersection of environmental degradation and human rights. Through her multifaceted storytelling, Fabeha continues to challenge narratives and provoke dialogue. Publication Date August 22, 2025 Fabeha Monir Reporting Fellow GPJ Accurate Republish About Global Press Global Press Style Guide Join Our Team Corrections Write a Letter to the Editor Contact 5636 Connecticut Ave NW PO Box 42557 Washington, DC 20015 [email protected] 202-240-2705 Information About Global Press Style Guide Contact Us Subscribe to Newsletters Brands Global Press Global Press Institute Global Press Journal Connect with Global press Newsletter Signup.