Turks and Caicos Islands: Knowledge Base profile - GOV.UK Cookies on GOV.UK We use some essential cookies to make this website work. We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services. We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services. You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. Accept additional cookies Reject additional cookies View cookies Hide cookie message Skip to main content GOV.UK Navigation menu Menu Menu Services and information Benefits Births, death, marriages and care Business and self-employed Childcare and parenting Citizenship and living in the UK Crime, justice and the law Disabled people Driving and transport Education and learning Employing people Environment and countryside Housing and local services Money and tax Passports, travel and living abroad Visas and immigration Working, jobs and pensions Government activity Departments Departments, agencies and public bodies News News stories, speeches, letters and notices Guidance and regulation Detailed guidance, regulations and rules Research and statistics Reports, analysis and official statistics Policy papers and consultations Consultations and strategy Transparency Data, Freedom of Information releases and corporate reports Search GOV.UK × Search GOV.UK Search Search GOV.UK Search Home Going and being abroad Passports Turks and Caicos Islands: Knowledge Base profile HM Passport Office Guidance Turks and Caicos Islands: Knowledge Base profile Updated 14 April 2025 Contents About: Turks and Caicos Islands Turks and Caicos Islands: names Turks and Caicos Islands: nationality Turks and Caicos Islands: legitimacy and parental responsibility Turks and Caicos Islands: adoption Turks and Caicos Islands: gender recognition Turks and Caicos Islands: civil partnerships and marriage Turks and Caicos Islands: documents Print this page © Crown copyright 2025 This publication is licensed under the terms of the Open Government Licence v3.0 except where otherwise stated. To view this licence, visit nationalarchives.gov.uk/doc/open-government-licence/version/3 or write to the Information Policy Team, The National Archives, Kew, London TW9 4DU, or email: psi@nationalarchives.gov.uk . Where we have identified any third party copyright information you will need to obtain permission from the copyright holders concerned. This publication is available at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/turks-and-caicos-islands-knowledge-base-profile/turks-and-caicos-islands-knowledge-base-profile About: Turks and Caicos Islands This document contains useful information about Turks and Caicos Islands which will assist His Majesty’s Passport Office staff process passport applications. Contacts If you have any questions about the document and your line manager or senior caseworker cannot help you or you think that the document has factual errors then email the Guidance team. If you notice any formatting errors in this document (broken links, spelling mistakes and so on) or have any comments about the layout or navigability of the document then you can email the Guidance team. Publication Below is information on when this version of the document was published: version 4.0 published for Home Office staff on 6 January 2025 Changes from last version of this document This document has been updated with minor formatting changesto reflect the updated timeframes regarding belonger status in the Turks and Caicos islands. Turks and Caicos Islands: names This section gives HM Passport Office operational staff information about names in the Turks and Caicos Islands. Change of name Name changes are allowed in the Turks and Caicos Islands. Turks and Caicos Islands: nationality This section gives HM Passport Office operational staff information about nationality in the Turks and Caicos Islands. The Turks and Caicos Islands are a British overseas territory. Dual nationality is recognised in the Turks and Caicos Islands. ‘Belonger status’ is a legal term normally associated with British overseas territories. It refers to people who have close ties to a specific territory, normally by birth or ancestry. The requirements for ‘belonger status’ vary from territory to territory. If the customer has belonger status in a territory, it is the same as having indefinite leave to remain or indefinite leave to enter (being settled). Belonger status can be obtained if a person: has lived in the Turks and Caicos Islands for 15 years or more is married to a citizen with belonger status, and has lived in the Turks and Caicos Islands for 10 years or more A person with belonger status will be issued with a certificate showing their status or a letter confirming an earlier certificate by the Turks and Caicos Islands immigration office. A citizen of the Turks and Caicos Islands can gain belonger status, meaning they do not have to get their passports stamped on entry to the Islands. Settled status is defined as being free from immigration control. To confirm settled status, customers must have: a permanent residence certificate British Overseas Territory citizenship Turks and Caicos islander status Turks and Caicos Islands: legitimacy and parental responsibility This section gives HM Passport Office operational staff information about legitimacy and parental responsibility in the Turks and Caicos Islands. Legitimacy Turks and Caicos Islands recognise a difference between legitimate and illegitimate births. A child will be considered as: legitimate: if parents are married from the time of marriage, if the child was born to unmarried parents and they get married illegitimate if the child is born to unmarried parents and they do not marry Parental responsibility Both parents hold parental responsibility in Turks and Caicos Islands for the child if married at the time of birth. If parents are not married parental responsibility is granted to the mother only, unless there are known: facts of inappropriate behaviour mental or social issues Any court orders provided by a foreign court are not enforceable or legally recognised. Turks and Caicos Islands: adoption This section gives HM Passport Office operational staff information about adoption in the Turks and Caicos Islands. Adoption is legal in the Turks and Caicos Islands. Turks and Caicos Islands: gender recognition This section gives HM Passport Office operational staff information about gender recognition in the Turks and Caicos Islands. Transgender citizens are recognised in the Turks and Caicos Islands. Turks and Caicos Islands: civil partnerships and marriage This section gives HM Passport Office operational staff information about civil partnerships and marriage in the Turks and Caicos Islands. Same sex relationships are allowed in the Turks and Caicos Islands. There is no provision for marriage or civil partnerships between same sex couples. Turks and Caicos Islands: documents This section gives HM Passport Office operational staff information about documents in the Turks and Caicos Islands. Birth certificates Birth certificates are issued following the registration of all births in the Turks and Caicos Islands. The birth records are all held on a central record and only one type of birth certificate is issued. Marriage certificates Marriage certificates are issued following all marriages in the Turks and Caicos Islands. The marriage records are all held in a central registry and there are 2 types of marriage certificate in circulation. These include: an old style certificate, handwritten with a wax seal in the bottom right corner a new style certificate Naturalisation and registration certificates A change was made to the naturalisation and registration certificates issued to the Turks and Caicos Islands in 2012. Prior to 2012, these naturalisation and registration certificates did not have a subsection to state how the citizen became a British Overseas Territories Citizen (BOTC). These details were added to the certificates from 2012 onwards. Back to top Is this page useful? Maybe Yes this page is useful No this page is not useful Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Do not include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab and requires JavaScript ) . Cancel Services and information Benefits Births, death, marriages and care Business and self-employed Childcare and parenting Citizenship and living in the UK Crime, justice and the law Disabled people Driving and transport Education and learning Employing people Environment and countryside Housing and local services Money and tax Passports, travel and living abroad Visas and immigration Working, jobs and pensions Government activity Departments News Guidance and regulation Research and statistics Policy papers and consultations Transparency How government works Get involved Support links Help Privacy Cookies Accessibility statement Contact Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg Government Digital Service All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0 , except where otherwise stated © Crown copyright