Policy Brief and Case Study: Legal Gender Recognition in Fiji - APA Home About Us About Us Our Mission Our Operations Our People Annual Reports Our Members Our Members APA Value Statement Our Work Our Work Meeting Reports Blogs Building Evidence Our Publications Take Action Donate Share Our Work JOIN US SIGN IN PDF Download Policy Brief and Case Study: Legal Gender Recognition in Fiji 2023 The 2013 Constitution of Fiji protects against discrimination on the basis of gender identity and expression, making it the only country in the world with such legal protection. However, Fiji’s legislative and policy frameworks do not permit changes to gender markers or recognize traditional third gender identities, resulting in marginalization and discrimination against transgender people. Transgender people in Fiji face high rates of violence, abuse, and harassment, and are not widely represented in the public, private, or political sector. This policy brief on legal gender recognition (LGR) in Fiji will be used to support advocacy efforts for the recognition and protection of transgender rights in the country. It provides valuable information and analysis on the challenges faced by transgender people in Fiji and the need for legal gender recognition. Overall, this policy brief serves as an important tool for advocacy and education on LGR and transgender rights in Fiji. It provides a foundation for further research, dialogue, and action to ensure that transgender people in Fiji are able to live with dignity and without discrimination. Member Related Publications 2026 Policy Brief Shaping Positive SRHR Narratives in Asia and the Pacific: A… 2024 Statement CPD57: Member States Joint Statement Tweets by AsiaPacAlliance Raise Your Voice! Use your voice to stand up for sexual rights in Asia Pacific and the world About Us Our Mission Our Operations Our People Annual Reports Our Members APA Value Statement Our Work Meeting Reports Blogs Building Evidence Our Publications Take Action Donate Share Our Work Join Us Copyright © Asia Pacific Alliance. All Rights Reserved. Designed by Kos Design