Country Overviews | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Our Work Country Overviews LGBTIQ Human Rights by Country Outright is pleased to share our Country Overviews on the human rights and inclusion of people of diverse sexual orientations, gender identities and expressions, and sex characteristics. These overviews cover all 193 UN member states, as well as a few noteworthy countries that are not member states, such as Palestine and the Vatican. Our Country Overviews cover a range of issues impacting LGBTIQ people such as official laws and policies, new legal and policy developments, human rights violations, social perceptions, movement goals and priorities, and the role of anti-gender forces. Explore Regions Sub-Saharan Africa Americas Asia Europe and Central Asia South West Asia and North Africa (SWANA) Pacific United Nations Explore Countries Select Country Afghanistan Albania Algeria Andorra Angola Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bermuda Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cabo Verde Cambodia Cameroon Canada Central African Republic Chad Chile China Colombia Comoros Cook Islands Costa Rica Côte d’Ivoire Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Democratic People's Republic of Korea Democratic Republic of the Congo Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Eswatini Ethiopia Fiji Finland France Gabon Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Grenada Guatemala Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Honduras Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Jamaica Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Kosovo Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands Mauritania Mauritius Mexico Micronesia Moldova Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Palestinian Territories Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Qatar Republic of the Congo Romania Russia Rwanda Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and The Grenadines Samoa San Marino São Tomé and Príncipe Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Slovak Republic Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa South Korea South Sudan Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Sweden Switzerland Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Tanzania Thailand Timor-Leste Togo Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Türkiye Turkmenistan Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Vatican Venezuela Viet Nam Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe Go to Country Sub-Saharan Africa Outright in this region: Read the Research Browse Insights Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes, and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people on the continent. The Africa program supports the advancement of LGBTIQ people’s rights across Sub-Saharan Africa by strengthening national and regional movements and building collaborative partnerships to influence laws, policies, and institutions. Its core focus areas include: Movement building to promote equality and human rights for LGBTIQ individuals. Civic participation, fostering LGBTIQ inclusion in democratic processes and institutional decision-making. Eradicating conversion practices through awareness, advocacy, and survivor-centered accountability mechanisms. Countering anti-gender movements by enhancing community resilience, rapid response capacity, and legal protections. Economic empowerment through targeted support to advance financial independence for LGBTIQ individuals. Inclusive humanitarian response that ensures protection and recognition of LGBTIQ needs during humanitarian crises. Over the last few years, Outright’s flagship program on the continent has centered on ending conversion practices. Since 2019, Outright has partnered with The Initiative for Equal Rights (TIERs) in Nigeria, galck+ in Kenya, and Access Chapter 2 (AC2) in South Africa to document the widespread prevalence of conversion practices and their negative impact on LGBTQ people. Outright also provided financial support to new and upcoming LGBTIQ organizations and movements throughout the continent. Additionally, Outright supported African LGBTIQ activists in emergency and crisis situations with financial and advocacy support. The Africa program works at all levels: grassroots, national, sub-regional, and regional. Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cabo Verde Cameroon Central African Republic Chad Comoros Côte d’Ivoire Democratic Republic of the Congo Djibouti Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea-Bissau Kenya Lesotho Liberia Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritius Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Republic of the Congo Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Tanzania Togo Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Americas Outright in this region: Read the Research Browse Insights Human rights protections for LGBTIQ people have undergone fundamental and positive transformations across the Americas in recent years—with the legalization of same-sex marriage in several countries in South America, the inclusion of sexual orientation and/or gender identity as protected categories in some domestic anti-discrimination laws throughout the region, and the repeal of colonial-era sodomy laws in the Caribbean. These hard-won advances have also produced backlash and political pressures from anti-gender and anti-rights groups, contributing to violence and discrimination. Our work in the Americas spans both the Caribbean and Latin America, where we partner with civil society organizations and activists to advance the human rights of LGBTIQ people. In the Caribbean, significant progress has been made in dismantling discriminatory laws and policies. Since 2016, courts in Antigua and Barbuda, St. Kitts and Nevis, Belize, Trinidad and Tobago, Barbados, and Dominica have overturned colonial “buggery” laws. Legal challenges are ongoing in St. Vincent & the Grenadines and Jamaica, as well as before the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights. Outright continues to support Caribbean civil society efforts, including initiatives to address gender-based violence by challenging entrenched gender norms and training service providers to deliver LGBTIQ-inclusive services. In Latin America, Outright engages through strategic litigation and partnerships with national organizations. We have submitted amicus briefs before national courts and the Inter-American human rights system, and we provide support, particularly to groups working to eradicate conversion practices and promote inclusive legal frameworks. Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Bahamas Barbados Belize Bermuda Bolivia Brazil Canada Chile Colombia Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Guyana Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and The Grenadines Suriname Trinidad and Tobago United States Uruguay Venezuela Asia Outright in this region: Read the Research Browse Insights In Asia, we work in partnership with national and local LGBTIQ groups to stop gender-based violence and discrimination against LGBTIQ people in general and against more marginalized groups within the broader LGBTIQ spectrum. We promote acceptance of LGBTIQ people in all their sexual and gender diversity. Afghanistan Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Democratic People's Republic of Korea India Indonesia Japan Laos Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Pakistan Philippines Singapore South Korea Sri Lanka Taiwan Thailand Timor-Leste Viet Nam Europe and Central Asia Outright in this region: Read the Research Browse Insights Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression, and sex characteristics in Europe, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and, most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Kosovo Kyrgyzstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovak Republic Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Tajikistan Türkiye Turkmenistan Ukraine United Kingdom Uzbekistan Vatican South West Asia and North Africa (SWANA) Outright in this region: Read the Research Browse Insights The situation of LGBTIQ individuals in the South West Asia and North Africa (SWANA) region remains deeply complex and challenging. Despite growing global awareness and advocacy for LGBTIQ people’s rights, many countries in the SWANA region enforce laws and social norms that criminalize or stigmatize non-cisheteronormative identities. Cultural, religious, and political factors contribute to a climate where LGBTIQ people often face legal persecution, social exclusion, and violence. These overviews seek to shed light on the legal frameworks, societal attitudes, and lived experiences of sexual and gender minorities across the region, highlighting both the obstacles they encounter and the efforts being made by activists and communities to advocate for inclusion, safety, and equal rights. Algeria Bahrain Egypt Iran Iraq Israel Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Libya Mauritania Morocco Oman Palestinian Territories Qatar Saudi Arabia Sudan Syria Tunisia United Arab Emirates Yemen Pacific Outright in this region: Read the Research Browse Insights Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. Australia Cook Islands Fiji Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu United Nations Outright in this region: Read the Research Browse Insights Outright International holds a consultative status at the United Nations Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC). The United Nations (UN) is the birthplace of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, as well as the organization from which fundamental international human rights law originates. The UN sets global human rights standards, and facilitates processes for ensuring they are upheld by Member States. Outright engages in UN dialogues, debates, special sessions and annual events at the UN-NY Headquarters, including with the UN General Assembly and the Security Council. Outright works to ensure that UN institutions recognize, affirm and protect human rights for all people, regardless of sexual orientation, gender identity or gender expression and sex characteristics. Our status as a United Nations Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC) organization gives us year-round access to advocate for the human rights of LGBTIQ people directly with representatives of Member States and UN agencies at the UN Headquarters in New York. Outright brings LGBTIQ advocates and civil society leaders from around the world to engage with UN processes as briefers on country and regional discussions and as experts on thematic issues relating to sexual orientation, gender identity, physical characteristics and expression. Outright is a co-founder and Secretariat of the UN LGBTI Core Group, an informal group of 43 Member States, the delegation of the EU, the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, Human Rights Watch and Outright International. Together, we collaborate to mainstream LGBTIQ human rights at the UN headquarters in New York. Help us make an impact Outright International works together for better LGBTIQ lives. We work with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Programs Our research programs report on global threats and opportunities confronting our LGBTIQ communities. We share insights on urgent, relevant issues. Get Involved Support We support and invest heavily in partnerships with grassroots LGBTIQ communities and allies around the world. We provide technical, training and funding support where it counts. Donate Now Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International