Homophobia "perfectly legal" in Faroe Islands | PinkNews About Us Advertise Work with us Login Register Latest News View all UK US World Health Politics Sport Business Culture View all TV Film Celebrity Drag Theatre Music Gaming Lifestyle View all Beauty Careers Fashion Relationships Travel Shopping View all Deals Recommended Fashion & Beauty Tickets Video View all News & Politics Entertainment Lifestyle Discover Trans Awareness Week Drag Race Explainers The Queer Agenda Toggle menu Account Register Login Current Affairs Homophobia “perfectly legal” in Faroe Islands Nov 09 2006 Written by Marc Shoffman Share Save for later Comment LGBT activists in the Faroe Islands have generated around 20,000 signatures in an online petition demanding an end to sexual orientation discrimination and a registered partnership law to bring the islands into line with the rest of the Nordic region. The petition expresses discontent that homophobia is made “perfectly legal” because the government does nothing against it. The document says, “This protest is to show the Faroese Government and Parliament that whether or not it is in the name of Christianity, the surrounding world does not find discriminating acts against homosexual people acceptable. This kind of legislation is a serious violation of The United Nations’ Declaration of Human Rights “Unfortunately, right now violence and discrimination against people who have spoken up about their homosexuality in public is not uncommon in the Faeroe Islands. And because there is no law to protect the homosexual minority against such discrimination, it is often considered legal and acceptable to commit these actions against homosexuals.” Queer News. Straight Up. The LGBTQ+ stories you don’t want to miss, delivered to your inbox daily. Email address required Must be valid email Register By registering you agree to our Privacy Policy Thanks for registering! You can update your email subscriptions at any time in the My profile section of your account. The Faroes, population 47,000, is a self-governing overseas administrative division of Denmark located halfway between Norway and Iceland. In 1989, Denmark became the first nation in the world to pass a registered-partnership law granting same-sex couples the rights of marriage. Last year, the Faroese parliament rejected an ant discrimination law by a vote of 20 to 12. The new push for the law follows a homophobic attack in a bar in Tórshavn, the capital, on popular local radio host Rasmus Rasmussen, who is openly gay. Rasmussen and his family also received threatening phone calls after local media reported on the beating. Take action against discrimination of homosexuals and sign the AAH. Dec 31 2024 Every celebrity who came out as LGBTQ+ in 2024 All signatures will be sent to the Faroese Government. Related articles Opinion Mar 04 Whitewashing, influencers and gay death penalty: Dubai was never a ‘safe’ place World Feb 26 Lesbian group claim they have legal right to exclude trans women, to prevent discrimination Exclusive Jan 13 ‘It’s difficult to get over’: Ex-MP Harvey Proctor on lifetime of homophobia Africa Aug 26 2025 Kenyan court orders trans rights bill in landmark legal ruling World Jul 09 2025 All 65 countries where it’s illegal to be LGBTQ+ in 2025, including the UAE and Mali Latest News Previous Next Celebrity Sep 25 Trans influencer calls out Nikki Glaser for stand-up joke about what’s ‘in her pants’ Culture Sep 25 Trans pro wrestling trailblazer Gisele Shaw signs exclusive NWA contract Bisexual Sep 25 The Traitors star Freddie Fraser’s mum’s emotional response to his coming out Celebrity Sep 25 Lili Reinhart says Hollywood ‘too afraid’ to greenlight lesbian vampire project Celebrity Sep 25 Carly Rae Jepsen describes moment Heated Rivalry inspired her son’s name Celebrity Sep 25 John Green ‘heartbroken’ for trans Harry Potter fans as he talks JK Rowling Current Affairs Sep 25 JD Vance claims James Talarico has a “weird obsession with children in drag” News Sep 25 Susan Sarandon, Hannah Einbinder and Caleb Hearon detained outside UN after protesting Netanyahu What to buy now Previous Next Fashion Mar 27 Connor Ives and MAC team up to re-release the iconic ‘Protect The Dolls’ t-shirt Music Mar 12 The Pussycat Dolls confirm reunion with new single and tour – how to get tickets Music Jan 23 A full guide to the 2026 Harry Styles Together, Together tour including dates and presale info Shopping Nov 24 2025 Ten truly awesome Christmas gifts you can buy to support queer-owned businesses Trans Sep 09 2025 Lush creates ‘luxurious’ trans flag bath bomb to support trans charities Tickets Jun 25 2025 Dolly Parton announces mini Las Vegas residency after wrapping her last tour almost a decade ago Shopping May 15 2025 LEGO celebrates late gay icon Keith Haring with new art set: ‘Want this so bad’ Music Apr 18 2025 Primavera Sound’s most iconic queer performances, from Troye Sivan to Ethel Cain Exclusive Previous Next Exclusive Sep 11 Ania Magliano talks SNL UK season two and anti-LGBTQ voices in comedy: ‘We do edgy in the right way’ Exclusive Sep 11 Elliot Tuttle on Blue Film’s personal inspiration, rejection and taboo: ‘It’s about loneliness’ Exclusive Sep 09 OF star Andy Lee on love for gay fans, ‘poisonous’ creators and ‘harmful’ stunts: ‘Gay men lift me up every day’ Exclusive Sep 07 Real Housewives of London spill the tea: ‘She’d go to the opening of a packet of crisps’ Opinion Sep 04 Katseye in London: A showcase of real talent deserving of the deafening screams Exclusive Sep 02 Adrian Chiarella and Joe Bird on tackling conversion therapy in gay horror Leviticus Exclusive Aug 21 Sziget Festival drag and circus troupe want audiences to feel like family Exclusive Aug 20 Gay wrestler Anthony Bowens says Heated Rivalry shows authentic life of closeted athletes Register to save articles and more. It'll only take a minute and it's free. JOIN US TODAY! Already have an account? Log in here "/> Download the PinkNews app Award winning LGBTQ+ journalism About us Editorial Policy Contact us Advertise Work for us Terms and conditions Privacy policy Privacy manager Privacy Manager