Hundreds of Swiss change gender using simplified process - SWI swissinfo.ch Jump to home page Jump to navigation Jump to horizontal navigation Go to language selection Jump to content The Swiss voice in the world since 1935 Home About us Search Sections Geopolitics Democracy Science Swiss Identity Economy Swiss Abroad Latest News Swiss Films Videos Podcasts Debates Special Reports Opinions Newsletters Ask Swissinfo Guide to Switzerland Switzerland How-To Education in Switzerland Tourism Trends Housing in Switzerland Follow us Why you can trust Swissinfo en English en Deutsch de Français fr Italiano it Español es Português pt 日本語 ja العربية ar 中文 zh Русский ru My profile Bookmarks Personal feed Sign in Personal feed Sign in to add topics to your feed. Sign in now Bookmarks Sign in to add articles to your saved list. Sign in now Geopolitics Democracy Science Swiss Identity Economy Swiss Abroad International Geneva Human rights Global health Geneva organisations Global trade Humanitarian aid Swiss diplomacy Neutrality International cooperation Top Stories Six takeaways from the rejection of the neutrality initiative Read more: Six takeaways from the rejection of the neutrality initiative Swiss vote on how neutrality should be understood Read more: Swiss vote on how neutrality should be understood What’s behind the US decision not to invite OSCE election observers Read more: What’s behind the US decision not to invite OSCE election observers An advocate for the laws of war in a world that no longer believes in them Read more: An advocate for the laws of war in a world that no longer believes in them Podcasts Inside Geneva Read more: Inside Geneva Newsletter Our newsletter on geopolitics Read more: Our newsletter on geopolitics International Geneva Read more: International Geneva Swiss democracy Information wars Digital Democracy Global elections Top stories Swiss neutrality and food security initiatives suffer hefty defeat Read more: Swiss neutrality and food security initiatives suffer hefty defeat Swiss democracy in the crosshairs of Russian propaganda Read more: Swiss democracy in the crosshairs of Russian propaganda What’s behind the US decision not to invite OSCE election observers Read more: What’s behind the US decision not to invite OSCE election observers Swiss democracy How Swiss direct democracy works Read more: How Swiss direct democracy works Newsletter Our democracy newsletter Read more: Our democracy newsletter Climate solutions Glaciers & permafrost CO2 reduction Climate adaptation Energy transition Research frontiers Swiss AI Space research Top stories Fuel threat lingers beneath buried Swiss mountain village Read more: Fuel threat lingers beneath buried Swiss mountain village Swiss heatwaves linked to 600 premature deaths Read more: Swiss heatwaves linked to 600 premature deaths Switzerland’s worst-case climate scenario now more likely, say scientists Read more: Switzerland’s worst-case climate scenario now more likely, say scientists Cyber flaws in solar systems pose risks to Swiss power grid Read more: Cyber flaws in solar systems pose risks to Swiss power grid Podcasts The Swiss Connection Podcast: Hear Swiss science stories for the world Read more: The Swiss Connection Podcast: Hear Swiss science stories for the world Newsletter Our science newsletter Read more: Our science newsletter Demographics Assisted suicide Culture Swiss cinema Swiss fine arts Future of Work AI & Work History Top stories Self-determination over religious freedom: Zurich sends strong signal on assisted dying Read more: Self-determination over religious freedom: Zurich sends strong signal on assisted dying Nuclidium CEO: ‘Our challenge remains the demonstration of clinical efficacy and utility’ Read more: Nuclidium CEO: ‘Our challenge remains the demonstration of clinical efficacy and utility’ Having children is a luxury in Switzerland. Is the US next? Read more: Having children is a luxury in Switzerland. Is the US next? How poring over old journals gives insight into right-wing extremism today Read more: How poring over old journals gives insight into right-wing extremism today Debate To what extent do you think assisted suicide should be a legally available option to those who want to end their lives? Read more: To what extent do you think assisted suicide should be a legally available option to those who want to end their lives? Newsletter Culture stories by SWI swissinfo.ch Read more: Culture stories by SWI swissinfo.ch Medicine access Drug pricing Patient safety Pharma supply chains Health systems Health innovation Prevention AI and medicine New treatments Agribusiness Food supply chains Food safety Top stories Swiss heatwaves linked to 600 premature deaths Read more: Swiss heatwaves linked to 600 premature deaths How a handful of big agriculture companies have taken over food production Read more: How a handful of big agriculture companies have taken over food production Why Putin is placing Nestlé under compulsory administration Read more: Why Putin is placing Nestlé under compulsory administration Revolut seeks to challenge Swiss banking sector Read more: Revolut seeks to challenge Swiss banking sector How transparent is a Swiss hospital bill really? Read more: How transparent is a Swiss hospital bill really? Iron ore trader Radiant alleges Glencore hid their ties from audited records Read more: Iron ore trader Radiant alleges Glencore hid their ties from audited records Podcasts Reality hits: hard truths come to light in the final episode of ‘Lost Cells’ Read more: Reality hits: hard truths come to light in the final episode of ‘Lost Cells’ Newsletter Business stories by SWI swissinfo.ch Read more: Business stories by SWI swissinfo.ch Swiss abroad community Swiss politics Votes Moving abroad Swiss oddities Top stories Are the Swiss Abroad a drain or a gain for Switzerland? Read more: Are the Swiss Abroad a drain or a gain for Switzerland? Twenty-five years after 9/11: ‘I’ve never spoken about it until now’ Read more: Twenty-five years after 9/11: ‘I’ve never spoken about it until now’ From grey skies to heatwaves: climate drives Swiss abroad Read more: From grey skies to heatwaves: climate drives Swiss abroad Stay in touch with Switzerland The SWIplus app: your connection to Switzerland Read more: The SWIplus app: your connection to Switzerland News Hundreds of Swiss change gender using simplified process Since January 1, anyone who wants to change their official gender no longer has to go to court in Switzerland Keystone / Robert Ghement Several hundred people in Switzerland have changed their official gender since the introduction of a simplified registry process at the beginning of the year. In the big cities alone, 350 people have done so. Share This content was published on August 7, 2022 - 18:58 2 minutes Other languages: 4 EN original Español es Cientos de suizos cambian de sexo mediante un proceso simplificado Read more: Cientos de suizos cambian de sexo mediante un proceso simplificado Português pt Centenas de suíços mudam de sexo usando um processo simplificado Read more: Centenas de suíços mudam de sexo usando um processo simplificado 中文 zh 数百名瑞士居民通过简化手续更改性别 Read more: 数百名瑞士居民通过简化手续更改性别 Русский ru Сотни швейцарцев сменили пол благодаря упрощению процедуры Read more: Сотни швейцарцев сменили пол благодаря упрощению процедуры Eighty people changed their gender in Zurich, 47 in Basel, 46 in Bern, 36 in Geneva and 19 in Lucerne, according to a survey by the NZZ am Sonntag . Those involved were aged between 12 and 75, with nine people younger than 16. The proportion of those who switched from female to male was slightly higher than from male to female. Since January 1, anyone who wants to change their official gender no longer has to go to court in Switzerland. Transgender and intersex people can now change their first name and gender in the civil registry without bureaucratic complications. There are no longer any medical examinations or other prerequisites. More More Swiss Politics New year, new laws, new life in Switzerland This content was published on Jan 1, 2022 How will the new laws entering into force on January 1 affect you? Read more: New year, new laws, new life in Switzerland Civil registries gave a positive preliminary assessment of the new law. “The goal was to keep the hurdles as low as possible, and now they are,” Roland Peterhans, president of the Swiss Civil Registry Association, said in an interview External link with the NZZ am Sonntag . “If there had been people wanting to change their gender and then change back again after three weeks, we would have had to go over the books. But we didn’t have these cases.” He was also not aware of any systematic abuses. “We haven’t seen any men change gender in order to retire earlier or to avoid military service,” he said. Women can currently retire at 64 in Switzerland, men at 65; military service is compulsory for men, optional for women . Peterhans said he had personally dealt with around 30 cases and had met people who had been registered under the wrong gender for many years and were now happy to be able to take this step. “It’s incredible progress for them that they no longer have to expose themselves in court,” he said. More More New book captures 46 portraits of transgender struggles This content was published on Nov 20, 2020 On International Transgender Day of Remembrance, the book TRANS* is a reminder that transgender people are still victims of discrimination. Read more: New book captures 46 portraits of transgender struggles Related Stories Popular Stories Articles in this story New year, new laws, new life in Switzerland New book captures 46 portraits of transgender struggles News In compliance with the JTI standards More: SWI swissinfo.ch certified by the Journalism Trust Initiative You can find an overview of ongoing debates with our journalists here . Please join us! If you want to start a conversation about a topic raised in this article or want to report factual errors, email us at english@swissinfo.ch . Read more Back to top Follow us Stay informed daily about news in Switzerland with our Briefing in the SWI plus app for the Swiss abroad. Imprint Data Privacy Statement Terms of Use Rights to content and liability Privacy settings Jobs Play SWI About us Annual Report 2025 Newsletters Podcasts Contact SWI swissinfo.ch - a branch of Swiss Broadcasting Corporation SRG SSR RTS SRF RSI RTR SWI swissinfo.ch - a branch of Swiss Broadcasting Corporation SRG SSR Close Sign in and personalize Swissinfo Follow Topics Stay up to date with your preferred topics. Bookmarks Save articles for later. Sign in Later Close Personal feed Close Select topics that interest you. Something went wrong. Please try again. Save Cancel /* Download_on_the_App_Store_Badge_DE_RGB_blk_092917 ","app-store-en":" Download_on_the_App_Store_Badge_US-UK_RGB_blk_4SVG_092917 ","app-store-fr":" Download_on_the_App_Store_Badge_FR_RGB_blk_100517 ","app-store-it":" Download_on_the_App_Store_Badge_IT_RGB_blk_100317 ","arrow-caret-down":" ","arrow-caret-left":" ","arrow-caret-right":" ","arrow-caret-top":" ","buzzsprout-amazon-music":" ","buzzsprout-apple-podcasts":" ","buzzsprout-castbox":" ","buzzsprout-castro":" ","buzzsprout-deezer":" ","buzzsprout-goodpods":" ","buzzsprout-iheartradio":" ","buzzsprout-listen-notes":" ","buzzsprout-overcast":" ","buzzsprout-pandora":" ","buzzsprout-player-fm":" ","buzzsprout-pocket-casts":" ","buzzsprout-podcast-addict":" ","buzzsprout-podcast-index":" ","buzzsprout-podchaser":" ","buzzsprout-spotify":" ","buzzsprout-subscribe-link":" ","buzzsprout-truefans":" ","buzzsprout-youtube":" ","caret-right":" ","carousel-next":" ","carousel-previous":" ","chevron-bottom":" ","chevron-down":" ","chevron-right":" ","chevron-top-small":" ","chevron-top":" ","double-arrow-caret-left":" ","double-arrow-caret-right":" ","flag-blank":" ","flag-es":" ","flag-gb":" ","flag-mx":" <path d=\"M11.2998 8.74342C11.2299 8.70462 11.1678 8.58046 11.1523 8.5416