LGBT discrimination on the rise since 2021 military coup- DVB News Latest News Daily Briefing Archives Cartoons Editor’s Picks Opinion Long Reads Debunking News 2025 Earthquake Videos News Reports Peace Documentaries Feature Documentaries Short Documentaries Podcasts About Us Join Support Login Search Sign in Welcome! Log into your account your username your password Forgot your password? Get help Password recovery Recover your password your email A password will be e-mailed to you. Monday, September 28, 2026 Sign in / Join Facebook Instagram Twitter Vimeo Youtube မြန်မာ News Latest News Daily Briefing Archives Cartoons Editor’s Picks Opinion Long Reads Debunking News 2025 Earthquake Videos News Reports Peace Documentaries Feature Documentaries Short Documentaries Podcasts About Us Join Support Login Search Home News Editor's Picks LGBT discrimination on the rise since 2021 military coup News Editor's Picks LGBT discrimination on the rise since 2021 military coup By English Editor January 30, 2024 0 53797 Share Facebook Twitter Email Print Telegram Copy URL The LGBT community hold a protest against violence and discrimination in Launglon Township of Dawei District in Tanintharyi Region on June 29, 2023 (Credit: DDMSC) FROM THE DVB NEWSROOM In the last three years since the 2021 military coup, members of the LGBT community in Myanmar have faced attacks, arrest, torture and even sexual abuse at the hands of the authorities. The National Unity Government (NUG) Ministry of Human Rights stated in 2022 that 17 LGBT people were killed and two were critically injured since Feb. 1, 2021. “People gathered to protest against the military coup because every citizen had lost their rights. But in the LGBT community, we’ve had to fight for every right to be who we are since birth,” said Myint Myint, a transgender woman. A new research report called “Rainbow Amid the Storm” documented that 50 percent of LGBT have no confidence in the legal system. Over 68 percent fear repercussions from their abusers. Htet, an LGBT student at Yangon University, was arrested in Pyay in 2021. “A man whom [prison staff] called Lieutenant asked me to crawl on all fours and come to him, ordering me to shout in a male voice. Of course, I couldn’t change my tone of voice. But if I slipped up even a bit, he would sexually assault me,” said Htet. Saw Han Nway Oo is a transgender woman. She was arrested by the military and taken to an interrogation center in 2021. “My face was covered with a cloth. I was hit with a wire. My long nails were plucked and twisted with pliers. If I asked for water because I was thirsty, they would pour hot water on my face,” Saw Han Nway Oo told the BBC Burmese. The LGBT community in Myanmar has long faced discrimination. Section 377 of the Penal Code criminalizes homosexuality. “It’s a known fact that patriarchy dominates Myanmar. LGBT will never be looked at in a good way. Religious institutions and school taught us from a young age that it is a big mistake if a person is neither male nor female,” said Luis, a student from Yangon University. “We were taught that LGBT must not be treated with any form of discrimination. But the teachers themselves, who are teaching these theories, exercise discrimination. When they enter the classroom, they ask if there are any gays present,” added Luis. The research report “Rainbow Amid the Storm” also documented that 53 percent of all discrimination happens within the family with the remaining occurring in the business, health care, politics and educational sectors. “When the gender orientation is different, whether it’s a man or woman physically, these people are subjected to discrimination, mockery, as well as violence. Legislation is needed now to ensure protections for LGBT people as we move toward equal rights in a [federal democratic union],” added Myint Myint. Tags burma discrimination LGBT myanmar Share Facebook Twitter Email Print Telegram Copy URL Previous article Three Years Ago juxtaposes images from Yangon in 2021 with today; Military sends representative to ASEAN meeting Next article At least 20 Rohingya killed during fighting in Arakan State RELATED ARTICLES Breaking From Gaza to Sudan to Nepal, more than 500 million children are in desperate need of education September 26, 2026 Breaking Nepal’s climate catastrophe is a warning to the rest of the world, prime minister tells UN September 26, 2026 Breaking UN refugee chief urges action from Security Council so displacement no longer crosses generations September 26, 2026 Most Popular All 2015 Elections 2017 by-elections Accidents Aid Analysis Arakan Archives Arts ASEAN Ayeyarwady Boatpeople Books Breaking Briefing Bullet Points Bulletin Burma Business Business Weekly By Region Cartoon Cartoons Census Chin Citizenship climate change Communal Violence Conflict Constitution Contributor Coup Coup Crime Culture Culture Daily Briefing Dashboard Dawei Development DPDM Drugs DVB Debate Economy Editor's Picks Education Election Elections Electricity Energy Entertainment Entertainment Environment Fact Check Farmers Feature Feature Documentary Features Features (OLD) Film Film Finance flora and fauna Foreign Affairs Health History Human Interest Human Rights Human Trafficking Humanitarian IDPs Infrastructure Interactive International International Justice International Relations Interview Interview International Irrawaddy Division Justice Kachin Kachin Karen Karenni Kayah Koh Tao Kokang Labour Issues Land Latest News Latpadaung Law Lead Story Lifestyle Logging Long Reads Magwe Mandalay Division Map Media Media More From Gaza to Sudan to Nepal, more than 500 million children are in desperate need of education September 26, 2026 Nepal’s climate catastrophe is a warning to the rest of the world, prime minister tells UN September 26, 2026 UN refugee chief urges action from Security Council so displacement no longer crosses generations September 26, 2026 Myanmar regime recalls Ambassador to Thailand from Bangkok to Naypyidaw September 26, 2026 Load more EDITOR'S PICKS Mizzima marks 28th anniversary with launch of global shortwave radio service in Myanmar August 11, 2026 Myanmar activist Nan Lin to accept 2026 NED Democracy Award from US July 23, 2026 Thailand rejects Chinese request to ban Myanmar mining documentary July 17, 2026 LONG READS Members of the Rohingya community adjust to life in Australia but fear for those back home August 22, 2026 Scam centres growing ‘exponentially’ despite Myanmar crackdown July 22, 2026 ‘Food brings people together’: a Myanmar refugee chef’s story July 20, 2026 FOLLOW US Dailymotion Facebook Instagram Soundcloud Spotify Twitter ABOUT DVB The Democratic Voice of Burma (DVB) publishes daily independent news and information across Myanmar and around the world by satellite TV and the internet. DVB was founded in 1992 and is registered as a non-profit association in Thailand. © Democratic Voice of Burma 2024. Contact Contact