Montenegro politicians block law recognising same-sex unions | PinkNews About Us Advertise Work with us Login Register Latest News View all UK US World Health Politics Sport Business Culture View all TV Film Celebrity Drag Theatre Music Gaming Lifestyle View all Beauty Careers Fashion Relationships Travel Shopping View all Deals Recommended Fashion & Beauty Tickets Video View all News & Politics Entertainment Lifestyle Discover Trans Awareness Week Drag Race Explainers The Queer Agenda Toggle menu Account Register Login World Montenegro politicians block law recognising same-sex unions Aug 02 2019 Written by Lily Wakefield Share Save for later Comment Montenegrin activists march during Gay Pride parade in 2014. (Samir Yordamovic/Anadolu Agency/Getty) Politicians in Montenegro blocked a proposed law on Wednesday (July 31) which would have legally recognised same-sex unions in the country. Although the law would have recognised same-sex couples, they would still not have been given all of the same rights as opposite-sex married couples. Montenegro’s Human and Minority Rights Ministry drafted the law last year and received huge backlash from the Eastern Orthodox Church and conservative politicians. The country has a multi-party system, meaning that government is made up of many parties. The Democratic Party of Socialists (DPS) is the main governing party and it backed the reform to recognise same-sex unions. However, according to BalkanInsight , smaller parties within the ruling coalition opposed the law and blocked it from passing. Jovan Vucurovic, deputy of the conservative Democratic Front which was the main opposing party, told BalkanInsight: “After this law a law on adoption of children by LGBT population will follow. This was the case in all EU countries. “When we come to a position to decide, we will not even take this into consideration.” Montenegrin activists hold a rainbow flag during the Gay Pride parade in Podgorica in 2016. (SAVO PRELEVIC/AFP/Getty Images) The Equal Rights Association said LGBT+ people in Montenegro are “forced to live as second-class citizens” According to Montenegrin newspaper Vijesti , Danijel Kalezic of the LGBTI Equal Rights Association (ERA) for Western Balkans and Turkey said in a statement: “Due to the irresponsibility of the majority of Montenegrin MPs, we are still forced to live as second-class citizens.” He continued: “Failure to pass the law means that the person we love cannot visit us in the hospital because it is not legally recognized as part of the family. “Many citizens of our country are still without basic social rights on the basis of living together. “If we are unemployed, we cannot exercise any right or benefit on the basis of living together with the person we love, nor the right to health care.” In 2018 LGBTI ERA study , 51 percent of LGBT+ people from Montenegro said they were closeted, 76 percent said they avoided holding hands with a same-sex partner in public for safety reasons and 92 percent said discrimination on grounds of sexual orientation was common in the country. 83 percent said that the possibility of marrying or registering a partnership would allow for more comfortable living as an LGBT+ person in Montenegro. Queer News. Straight Up. The LGBTQ+ stories you don’t want to miss, delivered to your inbox daily. Email address required Must be valid email Register By registering you agree to our Privacy Policy Thanks for registering! You can update your email subscriptions at any time in the My profile section of your account. Dec 31 2024 Every celebrity who came out as LGBTQ+ in 2024 Related articles Europe Mar 23 Polish court rules foreign same-sex marriages must be recognised Europe Apr 30 2024 The Czech Republic signs expanded union for same-sex couples into law but doesn’t include marriage Europe Oct 05 2022 Slovenia legalises same-sex marriage and adoption as neighbouring countries impose anti-LGBTQ+ laws Europe Mar 17 2022 Kosovo MPs reject bid to legalise same-sex unions: ‘Homophobes have no place in parliament’ Lifestyle Jul 27 2021 Staunchly conservative Montenegro makes history with first same-sex civil partnership Latest News Previous Next Celebrity Sep 25 Trans influencer calls out Nikki Glaser for stand-up joke about what’s ‘in her pants’ Culture Sep 25 Trans pro wrestling trailblazer Gisele Shaw signs exclusive NWA contract Bisexual Sep 25 The Traitors star Freddie Fraser’s mum’s emotional response to his coming out Celebrity Sep 25 Lili Reinhart says Hollywood ‘too afraid’ to greenlight lesbian vampire project Celebrity Sep 25 Carly Rae Jepsen describes moment Heated Rivalry inspired her son’s name Celebrity Sep 25 John Green ‘heartbroken’ for trans Harry Potter fans as he talks JK Rowling Current Affairs Sep 25 JD Vance claims James Talarico has a “weird obsession with children in drag” News Sep 25 Susan Sarandon, Hannah Einbinder and Caleb Hearon detained outside UN after protesting Netanyahu What to buy now Previous Next Fashion Mar 27 Connor Ives and MAC team up to re-release the iconic ‘Protect The Dolls’ t-shirt Music Mar 12 The Pussycat Dolls confirm reunion with new single and tour – how to get tickets Music Jan 23 A full guide to the 2026 Harry Styles Together, Together tour including dates and presale info Shopping Nov 24 2025 Ten truly awesome Christmas gifts you can buy to support queer-owned businesses Trans Sep 09 2025 Lush creates ‘luxurious’ trans flag bath bomb to support trans charities Tickets Jun 25 2025 Dolly Parton announces mini Las Vegas residency after wrapping her last tour almost a decade ago Shopping May 15 2025 LEGO celebrates late gay icon Keith Haring with new art set: ‘Want this so bad’ Music Apr 18 2025 Primavera Sound’s most iconic queer performances, from Troye Sivan to Ethel Cain Exclusive Previous Next Exclusive Sep 11 Ania Magliano talks SNL UK season two and anti-LGBTQ voices in comedy: ‘We do edgy in the right way’ Exclusive Sep 11 Elliot Tuttle on Blue Film’s personal inspiration, rejection and taboo: ‘It’s about loneliness’ Exclusive Sep 09 OF star Andy Lee on love for gay fans, ‘poisonous’ creators and ‘harmful’ stunts: ‘Gay men lift me up every day’ Exclusive Sep 07 Real Housewives of London spill the tea: ‘She’d go to the opening of a packet of crisps’ Opinion Sep 04 Katseye in London: A showcase of real talent deserving of the deafening screams Exclusive Sep 02 Adrian Chiarella and Joe Bird on tackling conversion therapy in gay horror Leviticus Exclusive Aug 21 Sziget Festival drag and circus troupe want audiences to feel like family Exclusive Aug 20 Gay wrestler Anthony Bowens says Heated Rivalry shows authentic life of closeted athletes Register to save articles and more. It'll only take a minute and it's free. JOIN US TODAY! Already have an account? Log in here "/> Download the PinkNews app Award winning LGBTQ+ journalism About us Editorial Policy Contact us Advertise Work for us Terms and conditions Privacy policy Privacy manager Privacy Manager