Trans woman killed in Georgia day after anti-LGBT law passed Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Home News US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business World of Business Technology of Business NYSE Opening Bell Technology Artificial Intelligence Intelligence Revolution AI v the Mind Tech Now Health Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList To the Ends of the Earth Earth Science Natural Wonders Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcast Categories Radio Audio FAQs Video BBC Maestro Discover the World Live Live News Live Sport Site search Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters Trans woman killed in Georgia day after anti-LGBT law passed 20 September 2024 Share Save Add as preferred on Google Frances Mao BBC News INSTAGRAM Model and influencer Kesaria Abramidze had been seen as a trans leader in the Georgian community One of Georgia's most well-known transgender women has been killed in her home, a day after the country's parliament passed a major anti-LGBT bill. Local officials say Kesaria Abramidze, 37, was stabbed to death in her flat in the capital, Tbilisi, on Wednesday. The interior ministry said it was investigating a "premeditated murder committed with particular cruelty and aggravating circumstances on gender grounds". A 26-year-old man has been arrested in the case that has shocked the small South Caucasian nation. Georgian media reported he was known to the victim. Rights groups have linked the killing to the new anti-LGBT law, arguing the government's promotion of it had fuelled transphobic hate crime. Georgian President Salome Zurabishvili, who opposed the new law, said the "horrendous murder" raised urgent questions about hate crimes and discrimination. The legislation from Prime Minister Irakli Kobakhidze's government severely restricts rights for LGBT people. It introduces a ban on same-sex marriage, gender-affirming surgeries, child adoption by non-heterosexuals and the promotion of same-sex relationships in schools. The bill sailed through parliament on Tuesday in an 84-0 vote, despite criticism from rights groups. The ruling party said the "Protection of Family Values and Minors" bill was designed to protect a majority of Georgians seeking protection from "LGBT propaganda". But local LGBT rights campaigners said the government had used homophobic and transphobic language and ideas in promoting the bill. Several activists directly linked what they said was the government's harmful rhetoric to the killing of Ms Abramidze. One of the first openly trans public figures in the country, she had represented Georgia in international trans pageants and had more than 500,000 followers on social media. "Political homophobia, biphobia, and transphobia have become central to the government’s official discourse and ideology," said local human rights group the Social Justice Center. "Kesaria Abramidze's killing cannot be viewed separately from this overall grave context," it added. Georgia Pride stormed by right-wing protesters in 2023 Progressive politicians outside the country have also linked the killing to the government's legislative agenda. "Those who sow hatred will reap violence. Kesaria Abramidze was killed just one day after the Georgian parliament passed the anti-LGBTI law,” wrote German lawmaker Michael Roth, the social democratic chair of the country's foreign affairs committee. European Union figures had already condemned the legislation when it passed earlier this week, saying it further jeopardised the country's stated aim of joining the EU. Josep Borrell, the EU's foreign policy chief, said the law was "further derailing the country from its EU path". He called on the Georgian government to withdraw the law. The legislation undermines the "fundamental rights of the people" and increases discrimination and stigmatisation, he added. The British embassy has also expressed "serious concerns". Rights groups have characterised the Georgian legislation as being similar to Russian laws which severely restrict LGBT rights. The Washington-based think tank Freedom House said the bill was "pulled directly from the Kremlin's authoritarian playbook". Georgia Related The best of Pierce Charles against Georgia 'Kvaratskhelia denied by Charles!' Georgia v Northern Ireland - who has impressed you? British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages The BBC is in multiple languages Read the BBC In your own language BBC News Brasil BBC News Mundo (Spanish) BBC News မြန်မာ (Burmese) BBC News 中文 (Chinese) BBC News Indonesia BBC News 코리아 (Korean) BBC News ไทย (Thai) BBC News Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese) BBC News Azərbaycanca (Azeri) BBC News Magyarul (Hungarian) BBC News Кыргыз Кызматы (Kyrgyz) BBC News Polska (Polish) BBC News România (Romanian) BBC News Русская служба (Russian) BBC News na srpskom (Serbian) BBC News Україна (Ukrainian) BBC News O'zbek (Uzbek) BBC News عربي (Arabic) BBC News فارسی (Persian) BBC News Türkçe (Turkish) BBC News বাংলা (Bengali) BBC News دری (Dari) BBC News ગુજરાતી (Gujarati) BBC News हिन्दी (Hindi) BBC News मराठी (Marathi) BBC News नेपाली (Nepali) BBC News සිංහල (Sinhala) BBC News ਪੰਜਾਬੀ (Punjabi) BBC News Afaan Oromoo BBC News አማርኛ (Amharic) BBC News Afrique (French) BBC News Hausa BBC News Gaelic NAIDHEACHDAN BBC News Ìgbò BBC News Japanese 日本語 BBC News Gahuza BBC News Pidgin BBC News Somali BBC News Swahili BBC News தமிழ் (Tamil) BBC News తెలుగు (Telugu) BBC News ትግርኛ (Tigrinya) BBC News اردو (Urdu) BBC News Yorùbá BBC News World Service Follow BBC on: Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Do not share or sell my info Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us BBC.com Help & FAQs Content Index Set Preferred Source Copyright 2026 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.