Sauna Raid Highlights Growing Restrictions on Malaysia’s LGBTQ+ Community – The Diplomat All Sections Search Read The Diplomat , Know The Asia-Pacific Central Asia East Asia Oceania South Asia Southeast Asia | Security Politics Diplomacy Economy Society Environment Opinion Features | All Regions Central Asia East Asia Oceania South Asia Southeast Asia Topics Diplomacy Economy Environment Opinion Politics Security Society Blogs ASEAN Beat Asia Defense China Power Crossroads Asia Flashpoints Oceania Pacific Money The Debate The Koreas The Pulse Tokyo Report Trans-Pacific View More Features Interviews Photo Essays Podcasts Videos Newsletter Diplomat Brief Weekly Newsletter The Diplomat Home Page About Us Contact Us Write for Us Advertise Syndicate Privacy Newsletter Subscriptions ASEAN Beat Sauna Raid Highlights Growing Restrictions on Malaysia’s LGBTQ+ Community Recent Features Society ‘Xi, You’re Not Welcome’: As Trump Hosts China’s Leader, Thousands Protest in Washington Society What Lies Behind the Rise in Anti-Israel Sentiment in Thailand? Environment Can a Network of Miniature Sponge Cities Help Central Asia Curb Climate Change? Society Burmese Refugees in Thailand Face Fresh Deportation Threat Diplomacy Trump and Xi: Strongmen at the Temple of Thymos Society Hindutva Is Slowly Seeping Into Nepal Security Busting the Myths of the US Military’s Presence in Hawai‘i Society Abroad, India’s RSS Speaks of ‘Love.’ At Home, Its Affiliates Attack Christians. Diplomacy What’s Wrong With US Pacific Islands Policy? Environment Who Is to Blame for the Massive Death Toll in the Nepal Floods? Politics From Nomad Festival to National Showcase: Kyrgyzstan Takes Center Stage Security Fighters Without Borders: Mercenaries, Adventurers, and Volunteers in Myanmar’s Civil War Subscribe for ads-free reading ASEAN Beat | Society | Southeast Asia Sauna Raid Highlights Growing Restrictions on Malaysia’s LGBTQ+ Community Queer community organizations mobilized to help release over 200 men detained following a police raid on a sauna believed to have been used for “immoral activities.” By Robin Vochelet December 10, 2025 Credit: Depositphotos Subscribe for ads-free reading On November 28, Malaysian police raided a male-only sauna in the Chow Kit neighborhood of Kuala Lumpur and arrested 208 men believed to be engaging in “immoral activities.” It was the largest police crackdown on a gay space since the 2022 raid on the Shagrilla drag event at REX in Kuala Lumpur. Several local media outlets were seemingly tipped off ahead of the raid. The police shared raw footage and photos of the operation with several Malaysian tabloids, with detainees’ faces clearly visible. Some of the men arrested also had their personal details leaked to the press and on social media, resulting in the suspension of 17 civil servants identified among the detainees. The men were arrested on suspicion of violating Section 377B of Malaysia’s Penal Code, a British colonial-era law that prohibits consensual sexual relations between men. The act is punishable by a jail sentence of up to 20 years, as well as whipping. The suspects were then transferred to the nearby Dang Wangi District Police Headquarters (IPD), marking the start of a grueling 48 hours during which the detainees were locked up in a single detention room with nowhere to sit or lie down, and received little food. However, they still had access to their phones, allowing them to communicate with the outside world. As news of the arrests spread, queer community organizations in Kuala Lumpur issued a joint statement condemning the raid and demanding that detainees be treated humanely. Advocacy groups also mobilized lawyers to help provide legal assistance and coordinated a grassroots-led food drive for the detainees. Researcher and community organizer Prishanth Linggaraj told The Diplomat that the detainees reported having only received one bottle of water to share between them, and the food the police provided was “insufficient and largely inedible.” JEJAKA , a grassroots group for queer men in Malaysia, took the lead in coordinating the food drive to Dang Wangi IPD, with volunteers and other community organizers helping to deliver the goods to the police station. Prishanth recalled that, upon receiving the food bags, police officers complained that the activists hadn’t brought water for the detainees. This peculiar interaction hinted at the incompetence and general disdain police forces would display as the situation unfolded. Under Malaysian law, individuals can only be detained on suspicion of a crime for 24 hours, and evidence of a crime is required for detention beyond that. Police authorities had applied for a remand extension, but as the 24-hour mark drew near, the magistrate rejected the application, ruling that there was no legal ground under Section 377B for continued detention. Even though the magistrate ruling came out by 9:30 p.m. on Saturday, the police waited until 11 p.m. to authorize the release of prisoners, requiring a Malaysian citizen aged 18 or older to bail them out. Authorities initially allowed bailors to release two prisoners, before quickly amending the process to limit bailors to only one prisoner. Around 70 prisoners were released by friends and family shortly after the no remand order was issued, leaving more than 130 stuck in police custody, including 31 foreign nationals whose remand extended for an additional two days. Activists on site said that several embassies sent staff to the police headquarters to discuss the release of foreign detainees. Meanwhile, local queer advocacy groups and civil society organizations mobilized to help release the remaining Malaysian nationals, calling out for volunteers to come down to Dang Wangi IPD to help bail them out. Word spread quickly via social media platforms, mainly X and Instagram, despite the late hour. By 4 a.m., close to 100 people had already mobilized in front of the police headquarters. Thilaga Sulatireh, an activist with the legal clinic and queer advocacy group Justice For Sisters ( JFS ), spoke about the tiring process of mobilizing volunteers amid changing, at times inconsistent, police instructions on bail procedures. “People were getting physically and emotionally exhausted as they were standing outside the police station, some were there for more than 10 hours,” she said. “As things kept getting delayed, people had to leave for work and to attend to other things, so we had to keep finding new bailors.” Prishanth posited that these delays and unclear bail procedures were a deliberate strategy from authorities to frustrate the process: “the goal is to make it as inconvenient as possible, hoping we’ll eventually get exhausted and give up.” Several organizers also pointed to the timing of the raid, just a few days after news broke that Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim might have been directly involved in the long-simmering mining corruption scandal in the Borneo state of Sabah, and as severe flooding was affecting parts of Malaysia, including the Klang Valley. “Sabah’s local elections were looming, and several Kuala Lumpur locations were affected by flooding; these agencies chose to allocate their resources in extreme measures targeting [LGBTQ+] persons in spaces like [a male-only] sauna,” said Gavin Chow, an activist with community organization and advocacy group People Like Us Hang Out . The Sabah scandal first broke in November 2024, and received renewed attention in the lead-up to last week’s Sabah state elections , which were won by incumbent Chief Minister Hajiji Noor, a close ally of Anwar. With new evidence suggesting that Anwar himself masterminded the scheme, some activists believe the raid was at best a waste of public resources on a victimless crime, and at worst, a diversionary tactic from the Anwar administration. Anwar himself was infamously accused of sodomy under Section 377, leading to his arrest and trial in 1998 at the hands of his political rival, Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad. His nine-year prison sentence was eventually overturned in 2004. His unfair trial and imprisonment made him a sympathetic figure in the eyes of Malaysia’s LGBTQ+ community, particularly gay men for whom Section 377B remains a threat. Many had hoped that his electoral win in 2022 would platform better advocacy for the country’s queer community. Instead, Anwar has repeatedly sided with Malaysia’s conservative Malay and Muslim factions, much to the detriment of his LGBTQ+ constituents. “We helped elect the current government to imagine a bright future, and this is definitely not what we hoped for,” lamented Chow, who was on the ground at Dang Wangi IPD throughout the prisoners’ detention. During that time, he helped coordinate the bailout effort by matching volunteers with detainees inside police headquarters. Chow described the ever-changing police directives as a “series of inefficient, unreasonable, and almost malicious administrative purposes,” and said that law enforcement had employed unusual procedures in handling the case. “We learned that the police intended to apply for a 7-day remand and intended to conduct a DNA test for all 202 detainees,” he said. He added that the police were still insisting on taking individual statements for all detainees after 8 p.m., almost 24 hours after arresting them, raising questions as to what had been done to advance the case prior to the no remand order. Despite the authorities’ best efforts to complicate the process, the community demonstrated an even stronger commitment to justice. As the crowd grew outside Dang Wangi IPD, bailors came with more food and drinks to bring inside when bailing detainees. Chow expressed gratitude for the activists, community members, and volunteers who responded to the immediate needs of prisoners during their detention, and those who connected with and comforted anxious family members of the victims. Following the community mobilization and media coverage of the raid, the Kuala Lumpur police stated they would review the standards of procedures for police raids, admitting that this incident “revealed shortcomings that must be addressed.” Local civil society remains unsatisfied with this statement, pointing out that it still favors conducting police raids, merely focusing on safeguarding the evidence against suspects. In addition to JFS’ work with detainees at Dang Wangi IPD, the group has since worked on providing legal assistance and figuring out next steps for the victims since their release. “The impact of the raid has been overwhelming [for the detainees], some have been facing employment discrimination, and we are also seeing an overwhelming need for mental health support,” Sulatireh explained. JFS, along with other civil society organizations, is documenting reported police abuses that occurred throughout the extended detentions, ranging from verbal abuse to blatant due process violations, as well as sexual harassment and lack of access to medical care. Sulatireh pointed to a lack of accountability on behalf of law enforcement, failing to address the trauma, anxiety, and stress many detainees are still experiencing, as well as preventing a similar incident from happening again. On December 2, Home Minister Datuk Seri Saifuddin Nasution Ismail said that “feedback from the Internal Security Division and the police suggests it is time to revisit certain provisions related to addressing such cases,” likely referring to Section 377B. However, he also called on civil society organizations to consider the “broader context, focusing on actions that contradict religious and moral values.” Just a few days after detainees were released in Kuala Lumpur, police forces in the northern state of Penang raided yet another male-only sauna, lending credence to activist concerns that Malaysian authorities will continue routinely targeting LGBTQ+ minorities and their community spaces. “If anything, the raid revealed that Section 377A and B should be repealed because it allows abuse of power and victimization of people with impunity,” Sulatireh said. While local civil society actors are still dealing with the aftermath of the raid and prolonged detentions, they also felt relief witnessing grassroots mobilization to help bail out detainees and bring attention to the case. “People cared for each other, making sure that family members and friends had enough legal information in various languages,” Sulatireh recalled. “As a queer person and activist, I am extremely moved and proud of our community.” Already have an account? Log in . You have reached the limit of 2 free articles this month. Get to the bottom of the story Subscribe today and join thousands of diplomats, analysts, policy professionals and business readers who rely on The Diplomat for expert Asia-Pacific coverage. Get unlimited access to in-depth analysis you won't find anywhere else, from South China Sea tensions to ASEAN diplomacy to India-Pakistan relations. More than 5,000 articles a year. Unlimited articles and expert analysis Weekly newsletter with exclusive insights 16-year archive of diplomatic coverage Ad-free reading on all devices Support independent journalism Subscribe Now View Subscription Options Already have an account? Log in . On November 28, Malaysian police raided a male-only sauna in the Chow Kit neighborhood of Kuala Lumpur and arrested 208 men believed to be engaging in “immoral activities.” It was the largest police crackdown on a gay space since the 2022 raid on the Shagrilla drag event at REX in Kuala Lumpur. Several local media outlets were seemingly tipped off ahead of the raid. The police shared raw footage and photos of the operation with several Malaysian tabloids, with detainees’ faces clearly visible. Some of the men arrested also had their personal details leaked to the press and on social media, resulting in the suspension of 17 civil servants identified among the detainees. The men were arrested on suspicion of violating Section 377B of Malaysia’s Penal Code, a British colonial-era law that prohibits consensual sexual relations between men. The act is punishable by a jail sentence of up to 20 years, as well as whipping. The suspects were then transferred to the nearby Dang Wangi District Police Headquarters (IPD), marking the start of a grueling 48 hours during which the detainees were locked up in a single detention room with nowhere to sit or lie down, and received little food. However, they still had access to their phones, allowing them to communicate with the outside world. As news of the arrests spread, queer community organizations in Kuala Lumpur issued a joint statement condemning the raid and demanding that detainees be treated humanely. Advocacy groups also mobilized lawyers to help provide legal assistance and coordinated a grassroots-led food drive for the detainees. Researcher and community organizer Prishanth Linggaraj told The Diplomat that the detainees reported having only received one bottle of water to share between them, and the food the police provided was “insufficient and largely inedible.” JEJAKA , a grassroots group for queer men in Malaysia, took the lead in coordinating the food drive to Dang Wangi IPD, with volunteers and other community organizers helping to deliver the goods to the police station. Prishanth recalled that, upon receiving the food bags, police officers complained that the activists hadn’t brought water for the detainees. This peculiar interaction hinted at the incompetence and general disdain police forces would display as the situation unfolded. Under Malaysian law, individuals can only be detained on suspicion of a crime for 24 hours, and evidence of a crime is required for detention beyond that. Police authorities had applied for a remand extension, but as the 24-hour mark drew near, the magistrate rejected the application, ruling that there was no legal ground under Section 377B for continued detention. Even though the magistrate ruling came out by 9:30 p.m. on Saturday, the police waited until 11 p.m. to authorize the release of prisoners, requiring a Malaysian citizen aged 18 or older to bail them out. Authorities initially allowed bailors to release two prisoners, before quickly amending the process to limit bailors to only one prisoner. Around 70 prisoners were released by friends and family shortly after the no remand order was issued, leaving more than 130 stuck in police custody, including 31 foreign nationals whose remand extended for an additional two days. Activists on site said that several embassies sent staff to the police headquarters to discuss the release of foreign detainees. Meanwhile, local queer advocacy groups and civil society organizations mobilized to help release the remaining Malaysian nationals, calling out for volunteers to come down to Dang Wangi IPD to help bail them out. Word spread quickly via social media platforms, mainly X and Instagram, despite the late hour. By 4 a.m., close to 100 people had already mobilized in front of the police headquarters. Thilaga Sulatireh, an activist with the legal clinic and queer advocacy group Justice For Sisters ( JFS ), spoke about the tiring process of mobilizing volunteers amid changing, at times inconsistent, police instructions on bail procedures. “People were getting physically and emotionally exhausted as they were standing outside the police station, some were there for more than 10 hours,” she said. “As things kept getting delayed, people had to leave for work and to attend to other things, so we had to keep finding new bailors.” Prishanth posited that these delays and unclear bail procedures were a deliberate strategy from authorities to frustrate the process: “the goal is to make it as inconvenient as possible, hoping we’ll eventually get exhausted and give up.” Several organizers also pointed to the timing of the raid, just a few days after news broke that Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim might have been directly involved in the long-simmering mining corruption scandal in the Borneo state of Sabah, and as severe flooding was affecting parts of Malaysia, including the Klang Valley. “Sabah’s local elections were looming, and several Kuala Lumpur locations were affected by flooding; these agencies chose to allocate their resources in extreme measures targeting [LGBTQ+] persons in spaces like [a male-only] sauna,” said Gavin Chow, an activist with community organization and advocacy group People Like Us Hang Out . The Sabah scandal first broke in November 2024, and received renewed attention in the lead-up to last week’s Sabah state elections , which were won by incumbent Chief Minister Hajiji Noor, a close ally of Anwar. With new evidence suggesting that Anwar himself masterminded the scheme, some activists believe the raid was at best a waste of public resources on a victimless crime, and at worst, a diversionary tactic from the Anwar administration. Anwar himself was infamously accused of sodomy under Section 377, leading to his arrest and trial in 1998 at the hands of his political rival, Prime Minister Mahathir Mohamad. His nine-year prison sentence was eventually overturned in 2004. His unfair trial and imprisonment made him a sympathetic figure in the eyes of Malaysia’s LGBTQ+ community, particularly gay men for whom Section 377B remains a threat. Many had hoped that his electoral win in 2022 would platform better advocacy for the country’s queer community. Instead, Anwar has repeatedly sided with Malaysia’s conservative Malay and Muslim factions, much to the detriment of his LGBTQ+ constituents. “We helped elect the current government to imagine a bright future, and this is definitely not what we hoped for,” lamented Chow, who was on the ground at Dang Wangi IPD throughout the prisoners’ detention. During that time, he helped coordinate the bailout effort by matching volunteers with detainees inside police headquarters. Chow described the ever-changing police directives as a “series of inefficient, unreasonable, and almost malicious administrative purposes,” and said that law enforcement had employed unusual procedures in handling the case. “We learned that the police intended to apply for a 7-day remand and intended to conduct a DNA test for all 202 detainees,” he said. He added that the police were still insisting on taking individual statements for all detainees after 8 p.m., almost 24 hours after arresting them, raising questions as to what had been done to advance the case prior to the no remand order. Despite the authorities’ best efforts to complicate the process, the community demonstrated an even stronger commitment to justice. As the crowd grew outside Dang Wangi IPD, bailors came with more food and drinks to bring inside when bailing detainees. Chow expressed gratitude for the activists, community members, and volunteers who responded to the immediate needs of prisoners during their detention, and those who connected with and comforted anxious family members of the victims. Following the community mobilization and media coverage of the raid, the Kuala Lumpur police stated they would review the standards of procedures for police raids, admitting that this incident “revealed shortcomings that must be addressed.” Local civil society remains unsatisfied with this statement, pointing out that it still favors conducting police raids, merely focusing on safeguarding the evidence against suspects. In addition to JFS’ work with detainees at Dang Wangi IPD, the group has since worked on providing legal assistance and figuring out next steps for the victims since their release. “The impact of the raid has been overwhelming [for the detainees], some have been facing employment discrimination, and we are also seeing an overwhelming need for mental health support,” Sulatireh explained. JFS, along with other civil society organizations, is documenting reported police abuses that occurred throughout the extended detentions, ranging from verbal abuse to blatant due process violations, as well as sexual harassment and lack of access to medical care. Sulatireh pointed to a lack of accountability on behalf of law enforcement, failing to address the trauma, anxiety, and stress many detainees are still experiencing, as well as preventing a similar incident from happening again. On December 2, Home Minister Datuk Seri Saifuddin Nasution Ismail said that “feedback from the Internal Security Division and the police suggests it is time to revisit certain provisions related to addressing such cases,” likely referring to Section 377B. However, he also called on civil society organizations to consider the “broader context, focusing on actions that contradict religious and moral values.” Just a few days after detainees were released in Kuala Lumpur, police forces in the northern state of Penang raided yet another male-only sauna, lending credence to activist concerns that Malaysian authorities will continue routinely targeting LGBTQ+ minorities and their community spaces. “If anything, the raid revealed that Section 377A and B should be repealed because it allows abuse of power and victimization of people with impunity,” Sulatireh said. While local civil society actors are still dealing with the aftermath of the raid and prolonged detentions, they also felt relief witnessing grassroots mobilization to help bail out detainees and bring attention to the case. “People cared for each other, making sure that family members and friends had enough legal information in various languages,” Sulatireh recalled. “As a queer person and activist, I am extremely moved and proud of our community.” Authors Guest Author Robin Vochelet Robin Vochelet is a freelance writer and multimedia journalist based in Bangkok, Thailand. View Profile Tags ASEAN Beat Society Southeast Asia Malaysia LGBT rights in ASEAN LGBT rights in Asia Malaysia human rights Malaysia LGBT rights Subscribe for ads-free reading Advertisement Latest Stories Mongolia’s New Government Set Ambitious Goals. But Are They Realistic? From Idols to KOICA: South Korea’s Disaster Support for Nepal China’s Visibility Gap Around the Trump-Xi Summit North Korea’s Ukraine POWs Are Now in South Korea. What Comes Next? Advertisement Diplomat Brief Weekly Newsletter Get briefed on the story of the week, and developing stories to watch across the Asia-Pacific. Get the Newsletter Advertisement Related Malaysia Says It Will Not Deport Rohingya if There Are Risks to Their Safety By Sebastian Strangio Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim's government has announced plans to repatriate around 5,000 Rohingya with Myanmar's assent. Malaysia’s Sea Nomads: Trapped Between Southeast Asia’s High and Low Politics By Mustika Indah Khairina and Wengki Ariando Sea nomads have faced decades of discrimination in postcolonial Southeast Asia. Malaysia’s recent mass evictions of the Bajau Laut are just the latest example. Malaysia’s LGBTQ Activists Deal With the Fall-out From The 1975’s Botched Performance By Robin Vochelet In addition to alienating foreign acts from Malaysia, the band’s controversial performance failed to elevate the conversation on LGBTQ rights in the country beyond "white saviorism." A Watch Seizure and a Criminal Code Designed to Clamp Down on LGBTQ Rights By Aisyah Llewellyn Malaysia's government is openly intolerant of gender and sexual minorities. Despite appearances, things aren't much better across the pond in Indonesia. Most Read Xi Jinping Is Coming to the US. Why Is He Skipping the UNGA? By Shannon Tiezzi Xi’s coming to the U.S. East Coast while the United Nations’ biggest event is going on. That makes his absence all the more striking. Hindutva Is Slowly Seeping Into Nepal By Biswas Baral The number of Hindu-Muslim clashes is growing as India’s brand of Hindu majoritarianism gains ground in Nepal. India’s New Eye in the Sky: EOS-05 Satellite and What It Means for South Asia By Abdul Moiz Khan and Sher Ali Kakar EOS-05 is a single satellite that is part of a broader initiative of India to strengthen its ISR capabilities. The Nexperia Case Was Actually a Success. Does Europe Know That? By Sense Hofstede A combination of media misunderstandings, Chinese distortions, and Dutch mistakes raise the risk that Europeans draw the wrong conclusions about economic security. Features ‘Xi, You’re Not Welcome’: As Trump Hosts China’s Leader, Thousands Protest in Washington By Tsering Dolka Gurung Over 3,000 Tibetans, Chinese dissidents, Uyghurs, Hong Kongers, and other groups joined protests during Xi’s state visit, calling for human rights and political freedom. What Lies Behind the Rise in Anti-Israel Sentiment in Thailand? By Andrew Nachemson Nationalist rabble-rousers have accused Israelis of trying to seize Thai territory, and Israeli tourists of misbehaving or disrespecting the country's culture. Can a Network of Miniature Sponge Cities Help Central Asia Curb Climate Change? By Walt Ohnesorge and Nargiza Muratalieva In lieu of decisive regulatory action and funding, much of the work of adapting to new climate realities falls on individual gardeners and cooperatives. Burmese Refugees in Thailand Face Fresh Deportation Threat By Alex Howlett A recently-passed law increases the risk that people fleeing repression will be deported and forcibly recruited into the military’s units of "one-way troops." Latest Stories Mongolia’s New Government Set Ambitious Goals. But Are They Realistic? By Bolor Lkhaajav Data centers, the Sovereign Wealth Fund, and a hydropower plant – will any of it better the lives of Mongolian people? From Idols to KOICA: South Korea’s Disaster Support for Nepal By Titiksha Devrani Pop star donations and state aid work together to give Seoul a durable bond with Nepal. China’s Visibility Gap Around the Trump-Xi Summit By Lina Ma Xi’s U.S. visit was extensively covered by official outlets. It's much harder to gauge public opinion or even interest. North Korea’s Ukraine POWs Are Now in South Korea. What Comes Next? By Michael MacArthur Bosack Both the South Korean government and the two former soldiers face an unprecedented resettlement process. Regions Central Asia East Asia Oceania South Asia Southeast Asia Topics Diplomacy Economy Environment Opinion Politics Security Society Blogs ASEAN Beat Asia Defense China Power Crossroads Asia Flashpoints Oceania Pacific Money The Debate The Koreas The Pulse Tokyo Report Trans-Pacific View More Features Interviews Photo Essays Podcasts Videos Archives Magazine A New Japan By Other Means APAC Insider Asia Life Asia Scope China, What's Next? Indian Decade James Holmes New Emissary New Leaders Forum Sport & Culture Tech Biz Tokyo Notes Zachary Keck The Diplomat About Us Contact Us Write for Us Advertise Syndicate Terms of Use Privacy Policy Newsletters Subscriptions Newsletter Diplomat Brief Weekly Newsletter © 2026 Diplomat Media Inc. All Rights Reserved.