Kuwaiti authorities arrest 23 'cross-dressers and homosexuals' | Middle East Eye Skip to main content Top Menu - English Version Live News Trending Opinion Video Explainers Search Search Algeria Bahrain China Egypt France Germany India Iran Iraq Israel Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Libya Mauritania Morocco Oman Pakistan Palestine Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Sudan Syria Tunisia Turkey UK United Arab Emirates US Yemen Youtube X Instagram Facebook TikTok War on Iran Israel's genocide in Gaza Toggle navigation Toggle navigation Sidebar Menu Mobile En Home News Opinion Video The Big Story Live Contact Discover Now War on Iran Israel's genocide in Gaza Follow us Youtube Facebook X Instagram News | GCC Kuwaiti authorities arrest 23 'cross-dressers and homosexuals' Homosexual acts between two adult males in Kuwait can result in a six-year prison sentence Kuwaiti women take a picture as the Emir of Kuwait, Sheikh Sabah al-Ahmad al-Sabah gives a speech after he was named a Humanitarian Leader by the UN (AFP) MEE staff Published date: 13 February 2015 02:45 GMT | Last update: 11 years 7 months ago Kuwaiti police have busted a “wild party” and arrested 23 “cross-dressers and homosexuals” at a chalet in the south of the country on Sunday. “The vice police received a tip about the party and a warrant was issued by the public prosecution to take action against the cross dressers and homosexuals,” a security source told local daily Al Rai. “The police encircled the chalet to make sure no one escaped and proceeded to arrest the people participating in the party. Some of them tried to escape by using the backdoor of the chalet and heading to the sea, but they were caught,” the source added. The daily said that investigations revealed the party was exclusively for "cross-dressers and homosexuals" who would face the charges of "engaging in immoral activities." Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Trans (LGBT) rights receive no protection in Kuwait and homosexual acts between two male adults can result in a six-year prison sentence, though there are no laws against sexual acts between two women. Cross-dressing is also illegal. New MEE newsletter: Jerusalem Dispatch Sign up to get the latest insights and analysis on Israel-Palestine, alongside Turkey Unpacked and other MEE newsletters In 2013, Public health official Yousuf Mindkar announced the introduction of a screening process at Kuwait's International Airport to prevent LGBT expatriates from entering Kuwait or other Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries. “Health centres conduct the routine medical check to assess the health of the expatriates when they come into the GCC countries,” he said. “However, we will take stricter measures that will help us detect gays who will be then barred from entering Kuwait or any of the GCC member states." The same paper later showed the minister appearing to backtrack on the move saying it was a “mere proposal.” “It may or may not be accepted,” he said. “The debate will reflect the keen interest of the GCC countries in human rights, taking into consideration the teachings of our religion and international agreements.” Some suggested that concerns over the hosting of the FIFA 2022 World Cup in Qatar, and the potential controversy that would ensue were fans to be screened, may have led to the backtrack . Middle East Eye delivers independent and unrivalled coverage and analysis of the Middle East, North Africa and beyond. To learn more about republishing this content and the associated fees, please fill out this form . More about MEE can be found here . Recommended Yemen War Saudi-Yemen conflict: The notion of an 'American saviour' is dead Trita Parsi GCC US presence in Gulf 'not enough' for security, Qatari official says GCC Saudi Arabia tightens rules on financial transfers to UAE Read more Human Rights Bahrain, Kuwait revoke citizenship of state opponents GCC Jailed Kuwaiti activist accuses government of targeting Bedoon for speaking out GCC Political tensions rise in Kuwait as opposition presses for change Top Menu En Live News Trending Opinion Video Explainers Youtube X Instagram Facebook TikTok Top Countries Algeria Bahrain China Egypt France Germany India Iran Iraq Israel Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Libya Mauritania Morocco Oman Pakistan Palestine Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Sudan Syria Tunisia Turkey UK United Arab Emirates US Yemen About About us Privacy Terms and conditions Careers Contact us Copyright © 2014 - 2026 . Middle East Eye. All rights reserved. Only England and Wales jurisdiction apply in all legal matters. Middle East Eye ISSN 2634-2456