Rights Sensitisation for Law Enforcement Officers | United and Strong (LGBTQI) St Lucia United and Strong (LGBTQI) St Lucia For you…for me…for US Menu Skip to content PARTNER ORGANISATIONS SOGIEI Litigation in the Caribbean and Latin America Who we are Contact United and Strong Inc Search for: Rights Sensitisation for Law Enforcement Officers May 21, 2015 stigma and discrimination , Workshops/Sessions Air and Sea Ports , Bordelais Correctional , Canadian HIV AIDS Legal Network , CariFLAGSRSLPF. , Customs officers , human rights sensitisation , law enforcement , Maurice Tomlinson Maria Fontenelle, Communications/Advocacy, United and Strong Inc ( Castries, Tuesday, 19 May 2015 ) Following a very successful human rights sensitisation with the Royal Saint Lucia Police Force in 2014, United and Strong is extending efforts to other law enforcement and community service providers. An exercise from Tuesday May 19 to Friday May 22, 2015, focussed on officers from the Air and Sea Ports, Customs and Corrections. It also included members of civil society who may have occasion to interface with law enforcement on behalf of their community. Human rights lawyer and activist Maurice Tomlinson is facilitating the session, along with his spouse Tom Decker, a trained police officer and instructor. The duo also conducted the first exercise, which spanned the RSLPF from the Commissioner of Police to new recruits. Executive Director of United and Strong Kenita Placide notes, “This training is important to continue to re-emphasise the need for better community policing and ensure the basic understanding of human rights is the foundation of policing in Saint Lucia. This training happening in Saint Lucia now, happened in Barbados last week and hoping for the rest of the OECS in the coming months is just a small piece of United and Strong’s advocacy and education to reduce incidents of discriminations and achieve equality for all.” U&S is hosting the exercise in partnership with the Canadian HIV AIDS Legal Network , AIDS Healthcare Foundation , the British High Commission , CariFLAGS and the RSLPF . In the final days of the sensitisation, selected participants will engage in a “training of trainers” session. This prepares them to instruct their own cohort, ensuring the continuance of the learning. In the long term, this is expected to result in a more humane and professional law enforcement, a reduction in stigmatising behaviours and a generally healthier society. Certificates will be awarded to participants during a closing ceremony at the Police Training School in La Toc on Friday May 22, 2015. The media is invited to cover the closing ceremony, which begins at 3pm. ————- United and Strong (U&S) is the strongest and most vocal LGBTI representative organisation in the small island Caribbean. A registered NGO formed in 2000, it houses the eastern hub of the Caribbean Forum for Liberation & Acceptance of Genders & Sexualities (CariFLAGS) and ILGA Women’s Secretariat. https://unitedandstrongstlucia.wordpress.com/ www.facebook.com/Unitedandstrongstlucia Tweet @UnitedStrongSLu For more on LGBTQIA persons in the Americas, see OAS http://www.oas.org/en/iachr/lgtbi/mandate/concepts.asp ——————————— Media Contact Maurice Tomlinson Kenita Placide Maria Fontenelle Workshop Facilitator Executive Director Communications and Advocacy maurice_tomlinson@yahoo.com unitedandstrongslu@gmail.com unitedandstrongslu@yahoo.com Share this: Share on X (Opens in new window) X Share on Facebook (Opens in new window) Facebook Like Loading... About Maria Fontenelle, Communications/Advocacy, United and Strong Inc Maria Fontenelle (1000WordsMedia), Communications and Advocacy, United and Strong Inc, an LGBTI equality organisation on Saint Lucia in the Caribbean. UandS is current the CariFLAGS EC hub and ILGA Women's Secretariat. View all posts by Maria Fontenelle, Communications/Advocacy, United and Strong Inc → Post navigation ← Public Invited to Discuss Homophobia on Saint Lucia LAC4 Nations Engage on SOGI issues at the UN → 2 thoughts on “ Rights Sensitisation for Law Enforcement Officers ” Pingback: United and Strong launches “#15Yrs4US” anniversary celebrations | United and Strong (LGBTQI) St Lucia Pingback: Antigua and Barbuda to benefit from human rights sensitisation | United and Strong (LGBTQI) St Lucia Leave a comment Cancel reply Δ Communications Proudly powered by WordPress Comment Reblog Subscribe Subscribed United and Strong (LGBTQI) St Lucia Sign me up Have a WordPress.com account? Log in now. Privacy United and Strong (LGBTQI) St Lucia Copy shortlink View post in Reader Manage subscriptions Sign up Log in Report this content Collapse this bar %d Design a site like this with WordPress.com Get started