Anguilla Gay Weddings, Gay Wedding Venue in Anguilla, Gay Wedding in Anguilla Let us help plan your perfect romantic celebration. Weddings & Honeymoons Inspiration Destinations Preferred Partners Offers Why Choose Us Community Email Please, enter valid email address Please, enter your email address Password Please, enter your password Forgot your password? Login Weddings & Honeymoons Planning your Wedding with Us Planning your Honeymoon with Us Planning your Vow Renewal with Us Planning your Anniversary with Us Guests Attend a Wedding Log In Getting Started Inspiration Adults Only Affordable Ambience All-Inclusive Chic Boutique Family Friendly Hidden Gems Leisurely Luxe Destinations Canada British Columbia Ontario Caribbean Anguilla Aruba British Virgin Islands Curacao St. Barths St. Martin Turks and Caicos U.S. Virgin Islands Central America Costa Rica Panama Cruises Norwegian Cruise Line Paul Gauguin Cruises Dominican Republic La Romana Punta Cana Samana Europe Denmark Greece England France Iceland Ireland Italy Scotland Spain The Netherlands Mexico Cabo San Lucas Cancun Cozumel Huatulco Isla Mujeres Ixtapa Riviera Maya San Miguel de Allende Vallarta Zihuatanejo New Zealand Auckland Bay of Islands Queenstown Puerto Rico Fajardo Porta del Sol San Juan Vieques Island South Africa Cape Town South America Argentina Brazil Tahiti Bora Bora United States Florida Hawaii New York Preferred Partners Hard Rock Hotels & Casinos AMResorts Bahia Principe Hotels & Resorts BlueBay Hotels & Resorts Blue Diamond Resorts Karisma Hotels & Resorts Majestic Resorts Melia Hotels International OceanH10 Palladium Hotels & Resorts Playa Hotels & Resorts RIU Hotels & Resorts Sandos Hotels & Resorts Offers Why Choose Us About Us Careers Contact Us FAQs Fun Excursions Groups Made Easy Press & Awards Testimonials Your Step-By-Step Guide Community Blog Publications Destinations → Caribbean → Anguilla Anguilla This slender, British island has some of the world’s top beaches and a friendly, relaxed atmosphere. Explore our Hotels, Resorts & Venues Plan your dream destination wedding in Anguilla! Explore our HOTELS, RESORTS & VENUES Overview & Marriage Requirements Overview & Marriage Requirements Travel Documents, Language & Currency Travel Documents, Language & Currency Climate & Beaches Climate & Beaches Activities & Tourist Attractions Activities & Tourist Attractions Overview Overview This quintessentially Caribbean island is named for its eel-like shape, which twists and turns along stunning Caribbean beaches that are frequently voted among the world’s best. Here, you will find 33 unblemished white sand beaches that are almost always quiet and uncrowded. To make the most of the bright Caribbean waters, be sure to schedule time snorkeling through the nearby cays or enjoying the island’s many water sports like kiteboarding and cruising on a catamaran. If you’re a fishing enthusiast, try a charter to catch marlin, swordfish and black fin tuna. Marriage Requirements Same-sex marriage is not currently recognized under the law in Anguilla. For information about symbolic ceremonies, check with your Certified Destination Wedding Specialist. Travel Documents, Language & Currency Travel Documents Passports are required for visitors entering Anguilla. If you are a citizen of the US, visit travel.state.gov for more information on travel documents needed. For Canadian travelers, visit travel.gc.ca for relevant travel information. Language English is the official language of Anguilla. Currency The official currency is the East Caribbean dollar, but US dollars are widely accepted. Climate & Beaches Climate Anguilla enjoys a tropical climate with an average temperature of 80 degrees F. Rains typically fall in September and October. Beaches Anguilla has 12 miles of coastline with some of the Caribbean’s least uncrowded and most pristine beaches. Rendezvous Bay is perfect for strolling with its long and gentle shoreline, while Shoal Bay has colorful beach bars and boat racing. Crocus Bay has coral cliffs that make for a perfect (and romantic) sunset hideout. Activities & Tourist Attractions Activities Anguilla is known for its striking and peaceful beaches, so many vacationers here like to rest on the soft white sands or experience the warm Caribbean waters via swimming and snorkeling. For the more adventurous, parasailing, kite surfing and wind surfing are great excursions due to the warm and constant trade winds. Boat racing is a great spectator sport in Anguilla, so see if your celebration coincides with one of the countless regattas held throughout the year. If you’re a fishing enthusiast, try a charter to catch marlin, swordfish and black fin tuna. Let us help plan your perfect romantic celebration. GET STARTED Let us help plan your perfect romantic celebration. Disclaimer: GayDestinationWeddings.com makes every effort to keep the travel information up to date on this website, however, resorts, wedding packages and laws do change and so we cannot guarantee that all information regarding rules, regulations, and marriage requirements at particular sites are completely accurate at the time of viewing. Before making marriage decisions on a particular destination, we highly recommend you speak with your specialist or wedding coordinator to verify rules at a particular destination before finalizing your travel plans. Ad - Horizontal URL: Search Personalized Celebrations from intimate to grand in size Unique and diverse wedding venues Exceptional celebrations for all budgets A World of Choice Hand-curated from 40 regions Extensive collection of LGBT-welcoming resort partners Exclusive offers, amenities, upgrades and perks Expertise Award-winning, Certified Destination Wedding Specialists Expertly trained and Gay Wedding Institute certified Exceptional service and knowledge of LGBT community Peace of Mind IATA certified 24/7 emergency travel support Dedicated Customer Service team EXPERIENCE THE DIFFERENCE. No budget too big or small, each wedding we plan is as individual as you are. Learn more INTIMATE. ROMANTIC. EXOTIC. The relaxation and privacy of having a romantic celebration in a private home. Learn more A CUT ABOVE THE REST. Exceptional romantic travel experiences that cater to your every desire. Learn more OUR TIME HAS COME. Hand-selected hotels and resorts that ensure a total embrace of same-sex weddings and celebrations. Learn more 1-888-704-1922 Copyright © 2026 GayDestinationWeddings.com | About Us | Contact Us | FAQ | Privacy Policy | Terms and Conditions