Abuse against queer people If you are having issues calling 112, click on chat or call +3545990112. Other ways to reach emergency services. Skip to content Menu Abuse Prejudice and violence against marginalized groups Abuse against queer people Abuse against queer people Queer people are more likely to be the victims of violence. Table of contents A marginalized group A marginalized group Fear of isolation or exclusion Fear of isolation or exclusion Types of violence against queer people Types of violence against queer people Domestic violence Domestic violence Sexual violence Sexual violence Hate crimes Hate crimes Religious abuse Religious abuse Resources Resources Related topics Related topics A marginalized group Queer people are a minority group in Iceland. Minorities are often pushed to the margins of society. The term for that is marginalization . People in marginalized groups must often overcome obstacles that others do not. The obstacles can be obvious or hidden. They can hinder queer people in getting help, education, power, information, and respect. Violence against queer people is often related to the group's marginalization. Everyone in Iceland can and should seek help if they are victims of violence or abuse. No one deserves to be a victim of violence or abuse. Fear of isolation or exclusion Icelandic society is very liberal, but prejudice can still be found in it. Not everyone is lucky when it comes to reactions and support from family, friends, or people in general. Fear of isolation or even exclusion may cause a queer person to not seek help. This barrier can grow if: A person has not publicly identified as queer. The individual belongs to a religious community. The individual is in an oppressive or abusive home environment. It is important to remember that all public service providers are bound by laws of confidentiality. They may not speak about your affairs to anyone. These providers include the police, health clinics, the national hospitals, and other service providers. You can go to them, and they will try to help you as much as possible. Types of violence against queer people Domestic violence Domestic violence is when the person who perpetrates the abuse is related to you or shares a home with you. For example, a spouse, ex-partner, family member or caregiver. Domestic violence can have many forms, including physical, mental, sexual, emotional, or economical (like withholding funds). Examples of behaviour that can be classified as domestic violence is when a partner or family member: Threatens you, for example by revealing your sexual orientation or gender identity before you are ready to do so on your own terms. Humiliate you or criticize just to belittle you. Tries to control you and what you are allowed to do. Tracks your movements and tries to limit your interactions with others. Threaten you with harm or to harm if you do not obey. Physically or mentally abuses you. Often, the person committing the abuse tries to convince you that queer people cannot be victims of domestic violence or that there is no help to be found. That is completely wrong. Anyone can experience domestic violence, and everyone can seek help. Sexual violence Sexual abuse is when someone makes you do something sexual that you don't want to do. That includes grouping or harassing you in a sexual way. Read about sexual violence in general . Queer people are more likely to be sexually assaulted than others, and the victim's sexual orientation and/or gender identity is often used to justify the abuse. Examples of justification are when perpetrators or others tell you: that the touches, kisses, and sexual harassment in general are not sexual in nature because of the gender of the person committing it and your sexual orientation/gender identity ( “You are gay, so it doesn’t matter what she does to you”) . that the fact that you have come out as queer means that you want people to behave sexually with you. "You asked for it." that you needed sexual abuse to "fix" you. Hate crimes Violence is classified as a hate crime when it is committed against people because of their race, sexual orientation, gender identity, skin colour, disability, religion, or origin. Examples of hate crimes: Physical abuse, emotional abuse or property damage against you because you are queer. When someone mocks you or calls you names because of your sexual orientation or gender identity. Threats in general and threatening behaviour, such as threats to "fix" you or reveal your gender identity or sexual orientation. Religious abuse Religious abuse is when an abuser uses violence for religious reasons. It's also when the abuser's personal beliefs are the excuse for violence. It doesn't matter if the victim is of that religion or not. Examples of religious abuse: When a person belittles your sexual orientation or gender identity for religious reasons. Use of religion to excuse abuse against you or even blame you for the abuse. When someone tries to force you to conform to their views on how people should be. For example, by undergoing conversion therapy. All types of honour-based abuse. Read more about religious abuse. Resources See all resources 1717 The Red Cross Helpline 1717 is a phone service and webchat for those who need someone to talk to in confidentiality. They are open 24 hours, and it's free to call. Read more Bjarkarhlíð Bjarkarhlíð is a center for people who have experienced abuse. There you get all the support and counseling you need in one place. All assistance is on your terms. Read more Samtökin '78 Samtökin '78 is the National Queer Organisation of Iceland. Amongst other things, they offer counseling for queer people who have experienced abuse in close relationships. Read more Related topics Marginalized groups Read more Neglect against adults Read more Coercion and restraint Read more Microaggression Read more Abuse against immigrants Read more Abuse against disabled people Read more Elder Abuse Read more Abuse against queer people Read more Hate crimes Read more Call 112 in an emergency. Neyðarlínan ohf. Skógarhlíð 14, 105 Reykjavík Telephone: 570-2000 Send feedback about Neyðarlínan's website Contacting 112 What can I do? Abuse in close celationships Partners Children and teenagers Icelandic Maritime Traffic Service Human trafficking Anti-Bullying Policy and Response Plan Contact us