Bulgaria asked to recognize trans' 'lived gender identity' You need to enable JavaScript to run this app. Skip to content Skip to main menu Skip to more DW sites Latest videos Latest audio Regions Africa Asia Europe Latin America Middle East North America Germany Topics Climate Equality Health Human Rights Migration Technology Categories Business Science Environment Culture Sports In focus German politics Ethiopia United Nations Latest audio Latest videos Live TV Advertisement Politics Europe Bulgaria asked to recognize trans' 'lived gender identity' Mark Hallam 09/04/2025 September 4, 2025 A non-binding opinion, issued ahead of a full case at the European Court of Justice, recommends that EU member states should be obliged to issue ID cards corresponding with a trans person's "lived gender identity." https://p.dw.com/p/4zzgL The recommendation to judges was that EU member states should be obliged to issue ID cards corresponding with somebody's 'lived gender identity' Image: Michael Bihlmayer/CHROMORANGE/picture alliance Advertisement Bulgarian authorities should not have the right to refuse to issue a transgender woman with identity documents corresponding to the sex she now presents herself as, according to a non-binding legal opinion issued as guidance ahead of a case being heard at the European Court of Justice . Advocate General (AG) Richard de la Tour recommended this to the court on Thursday. While his opinion is only advisory, such advice tends to reflect an eventual verdict in around two thirds of cases. He argued that the details of Bulgaria's refusal risked infringing on the person's right to an identity card enabling things like freedom of movement and residency within the EU. What is the case about? The case concerns a Bulgarian national, with the alias "Shipov" used on court documents, registered at birth as of male sex who has undergone hormone therapy and now identifies as a woman. "The discrepancy between her feminine appearance and her official identity documents as a person of the male sex causes problems she encounters on a daily basis, in particular looking for a job," an ECJ press release summarizing the opinion said. She applied for changes to be made recognizing her sex as female and changing details of her civil status on her birth certificate and was refused. Bulgarian courts interpret national law as only permitting changes to gender on identity documents that correspond with the birth certificate. Bulgaria's Supreme Court of Cassation, where the individual appealed, then forwarded the case to the ECJ, saying that it did not believe domestic law as currently interpreted could be reconciled with EU law. The Advocate General concurred in Thursday's opinion. Fact check: Trans athlete ban — fair or not? To view this video please enable JavaScript, and consider upgrading to a web browser that supports HTML5 video What was the basis for the AG's opinion? De la Tour proposed in his opinion "that EU law precludes national legislation, such as that interpreted by the [Bulgarian] national courts, that does not allow the legal recognition of gender identity for its nationals, including in the absence of gender reassignment surgery, or permit changes to their name or personal identification number to be legally recognized." The AG said that the Bulgarian law requiring "the indication of the person's sex based solely on the birth certificate ... gives rise, due to the purpose of that document, to an obligation for that State to legally recognize the lived gender identity and to record it in that document." This was necessary to enable a person to identify themselves without raising questions about the authenticity of their ID documents or the veracity of the information within them, he argued. De la Tour's opinion was that any law which, "by failing to recognize the gender identity of a transgender person, prevents that person from enjoying a right guaranteed by EU law, such as obtaining an identity document enabling them to freely exercise their right to move and reside within the territory of the Member States, constitutes a restriction on that right." The AG also recommended that the changes to an ID card "cannot be subject to the production of evidence of gender reassignment surgery." "Such a requirement would undermine, in particular, the right to respect for private life," the ECJ summary said. Edited by: Rana Taha Mark Hallam News and current affairs writer and editor with DW since 2006. @marks_hallam Send us your feedback Your feedback Advertisement Skip next section Explore more Explore more UK Supreme Court: 'Woman' means biological female under law UK Supreme Court: 'Woman' means biological female under law The top court has ruled that a transgender woman with a Gender Recognition Certificate identifying them as female is not considered a woman under UK's equality law. LGBTQ groups have condemned the ruling. Law and Justice 04/16/2025 April 16, 2025 Gender identity law passes in German parliament Gender identity law passes in German parliament The German parliament has voted for legislation smoothing the process for transgender, intersex and nonbinary people to change their name and gender identity. Society 04/12/2024 April 12, 2024 Skip next section More on Politics from Europe More on Politics from Europe Russian students: Propaganda in school prepares them to die The Russian government wants children to learn about patriotism from an early age. Politics 09/26/2026 September 26, 2026 Lithuanian prime minister urges stronger NATO air defense Prime Minister Mindaugas Sinkevicius outlined threats from Russia and Belarus, and NATO's need for stronger air defense. Politics 09/25/2026 September 25, 2026 Could Berlin expropriate large real estate companies? The Left won the Berlin election partly by promising to implement an expropriation referendum to solve the rent crisis. Politics 09/23/2026 September 23, 2026 Show more Skip next section Related topics Related topics Black Sea Bulgaria Footer About DW Who we are Press DW Global Media Forum DW offers Learn German DW Akademie Service Newsletters Reception FAQ Contact Topics from A to Z Headlines B2B Sales & Distribution Travel Advertising German News Service Follow us on Add DW as preferred source on Google © 2026 Deutsche Welle Privacy Policy Legal notice Digital accessibility Data privacy settings