Lesotho: ICJ makes a submission to the Universal Periodic Review | ICJ Donate to the ICJ By donating to the ICJ, you are actively participating in creating a just society. I want to help Home News & Advocacy Resource hub Current publications & practitioner tools Archive EU: Standards and Case-law on (alternatives to) detention of migrant children About The Commission Staff Work with us How we work Standard setting & normative development Research & fact finding Advocacy & strategic litigation Capacity strengthening Developing practitioner tools & guides Issues Accountability Business & human rights Civil, political, economic, social & cultural rights Digital rights & AI Disability rights Environmental rights Independence of judges & lawyers Sexual orientation & gender identity Women’s human rights United Nations Regions Africa Asia & Pacific Europe & Central Asia ICJ European Institutions Latin America Middle East & North Africa Impact Partners Sections & affiliates Networks Funders OpinioJuris website Donate $ Lesotho: ICJ makes a submission to the Universal Periodic Review 04 Nov 2024 | Non-legal submissions , Web Stories On 11 October 2024, the International Commission of Jurists (ICJ) made a submission to the UN Human Rights Council’s Working Group on the Universal Periodic Review (UPR) in advance of its consideration of Lesotho’s human rights record during the 49 th session of the UPR in April and May 2025. The ICJ’s submission highlights three key human rights concerns in Lesotho: Access to inclusive education for children with disabilities; The revocation of practising certificates of legal practitioners working for non-governmental organizations (NGOs); The rights to equality and non-discrimination of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, intersex and queer (LGBTIQ+) persons. Despite Lesotho’s acceptance of recommendations during its third UPR cycle in 2020 to ensure access to inclusive education, challenges remain in implementing the 2018 Lesotho Inclusive Education Policy (LIEP). Referencing the organization’s 2023 report on children with disabilities’ access to education in Lesotho, the ICJ’s submission highlights a number of concerns, including: inadequate financial resources; infrastructure problems; and inadequate training for teachers. The ICJ’s submission also expresses concern over the Law Society of Lesotho’s decision in May 2024 to revoke the practising certificates of NGO-based legal practitioners, which will hinder the provision of legal aid services to marginalized groups and, in turn, exacerbate access to justice challenges in the country, where State-provided legal aid is already limited. In addition, the ICJ submission outlines the organization’s concern about the fact that Lesotho’s legal framework fails to adequately protect LGBTIQ+ individuals from discrimination and violence, despite the introduction of new laws intended to address these pressing concerns following Lesotho’s 2020 UPR review. In light of these concerns, the ICJ’s submission calls on the UN Human Rights Council and the UPR Working Group to make the following recommendations to the Lesotho authorities: On the right to inclusive education: To invest in and carry out regular pre- and continuing in-service training for teachers on inclusive education. To accelerate the finalization of the LIEP’s implementation plan to ensure that the Ministry of Education and Training is comprehensively equipped to implement the Policy. To scale up the Special Education Unit’s capacity to monitor the quality of inclusive education through quarterly school visits. To desegregate the education system in Lesotho to ensure that children with disabilities can attend mainstream schools in the communities in which they live. To carry out full and meaningful consultations with civil society organizations (CSOs) and persons with disabilities, and fully operationalize the Persons with Disability Advisory Council, including by swiftly appointing a Director General. On NGOs providing legal aid services: The Law Society should affirm and ensure the application of section 7(2)(c) of the Law Society Act and desist from applying any procedure or process that insists that lawyers attempting to provide pro-bono legal services be members of law chambers to be accredited as practising members of the Law Society. The Law Society should work closely with NGOs to jointly map out and resolve the challenges in the provision of State legal aid. The State, through the Legal Aid Office, should produce, publicize and implement a timebound plan to fully implement the Legal Aid Act and commit to allocating resources from the national budget to establish multiple legal aid offices across the country to ensure wider accessibility of such services, beyond urban centres. The State should explicitly include a provision in the proposed Lesotho Legal Practice Bill that recognizes and governs the involvement of NGOs in legal practice. On the right to equality before the law of LGBTIQ+ persons: The authorities should explicitly include sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression and sex characteristics as prohibited grounds of discrimination under section 18 of the Constitution. The authorities should conduct a comprehensive review of all laws and policies in the country to ensure that they explicitly affirm and protect the human rights of LGBTIQ+ persons, including the right to equality before the law and equal protection of the law without discrimination. The legislature and relevant government departments should conduct this review in consultation with CSOs, lawyers, LGBTIQ+ persons and other relevant stakeholders. On the decriminalization of consensual same-sex sexual conduct The authorities should amend section 37 of the Sexual Offences Act to expressly repeal the common law offence of sodomy. The authorities should repeal the provision in Schedule I, Part II of the Criminal Procedure and Evidence Act, listing sodomy as an offence. Download: [Submission] Read the full submission to the UPR Working Group here . Recent News HRC63: ICJ Raises Concern over Torture, Executions and Impunity in Libya 23 Sep 2026 HRC63: ICJ Calls for Renewal and Strengthening of the Venezuela Fact-Finding Mission 21 Sep 2026 Joint Statement: Attacks on the Rule of Law, Judicial Independence and Access to Justice in Zambia 17 Sep 2026 HRC63: ICJ Raises Concern over Widespread and Systematic Arbitrary Detention in Egypt 16 Sep 2026 ← Previous Next → Donate to the ICJ By donating to the ICJ, you are actively participating in creating a just society. I want to help Stay informed Sign up to for news updates, information on our advocacy, and upcoming events. X/Twitter This field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged. First name (Required) Email (Required) Organization Subscribe Address & Registration ICJ – International Commission of Jurists Postal address: Case Postale 1211 Geneva 1, Switzerland Physical address: Rue des Buis 3 1202 Geneva, Switzerland The ICJ is registered in the Canton of GE under CHE-107.751.792 Contact info (dot) icj (at) icj (dot) org Switzerland office: +41 (0)22 979 38 00 Thailand office: +66 261 984 77 Nepal office: AsiaPacific (at) icj (dot) org Belgium office: +32 2 734 84 46 ECA (at) icj (dot) org Tunisia office: +216 71 962 287 Africa (at) icj (dot) org Latinamerica (at) icj (dot) org Reporting unethical conduct by an ICJ person The ICJ expects a high standard of ethical conduct from all those who represent the organisation. If you have a concern or complaint, please use our dedicated Whistleblowing Channel. Create a report © 2025 ICJ. All Rights Reserved. Site by Pomegranite Privacy policy | Cookie policy Translate » < < < < Manage Cookie Consent 🍪 We use cookies on our website to improve your experience. By clicking "Accept all", you consent to the use of all the cookies. If you'd like to control which cookies we use, please visit "Cookie settings". To find out more, read our privacy policy and cookie policy . Functional Functional Always active The technical storage or access is strictly necessary for the legitimate purpose of enabling the use of a specific service explicitly requested by the subscriber or user, or for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission of a communication over an electronic communications network. Preferences Preferences The technical storage or access is necessary for the legitimate purpose of storing preferences that are not requested by the subscriber or user. Statistics Statistics The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for statistical purposes. The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for anonymous statistical purposes. Without a subpoena, voluntary compliance on the part of your Internet Service Provider, or additional records from a third party, information stored or retrieved for this purpose alone cannot usually be used to identify you. Marketing Marketing The technical storage or access is required to create user profiles to send advertising, or to track the user on a website or across several websites for similar marketing purposes. Manage options Manage services Manage {vendor_count} vendors Read more about these purposes Accept all Deny all Cookie settings Save cookie settings Cookie settings {title} {title} {title} Manage consent