National Action Plan to combat hate crime against LGBTIQ Persons Skip to main content Swiss federal authorities Language dropdown English selected DE FR IT EN Federal Office for Gender Equality FOGE Federal Office for Gender Equality Federal Office for Gender Equality FOGE Search Search National Action Plan to combat hate crime against LGBTIQ Persons The National Action Plan to combat hate crime against LGBTIQ Persons aims to prevent violence, discrimination and hate crime against lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, intersex and queer people. The action plan addresses three scopes of action: support and protection for victims, prevention of hate crime, and monitoring acts of violence. The Federal Office for Gender Equality (FOGE) coordinates and monitors its implementation. © UFU On 28 January 2026, the Federal Council adopted the first national action plan to combat hate crimes against LGBTIQ persons 2026–2030 (NAP Hate Crimes LGBTIQ). With its three scopes of action – I. Support and protection, II. Prevention, and III. Monitoring – the national action plan aims to reduce hate crimes and other acts of violence and discrimination against LGBTIQ people and to protect their dignity, as well as to raise awareness among civil society and institutions. The action plan follows on from postulate 20.3820 Barrile (available in German, French and Italian). To support it in its work, the FOGE has formed a support group comprising representatives of the Confederation, the cantons and relevant umbrella organisations. The national action plan focuses on three scopes of action: Support and protection Objective: LGBTIQ victims of violence and hate crime receive appropriate treatment in the legal system. Reception and support structures for victims are adapted to deal with LGBTIQ persons, including young persons. Prevention Objective: The general public, professionals and volunteers are made aware of the issue, taking a transversal approach. Monitoring Objective: Monitoring is improved and strengthened to determine the scale of violence and hostilities and provide reliable data to guide policies and preventive action. Measures The national action plan to combat hate crimes against LGBTIQ persons includes 12 measures. On the one hand, it includes pragmatic and achievable short- and medium-term measures, such as organising a one-day training course on caring for LGBTIQ victims of violence, updating existing documentation on LGBTQ topics in sport and increasing its visibility. On the other hand, the national action plan aims to enshrine the protection and equality of LGBTIQ people in institutional and societal practices in the long term, in particular by improving access to emergency accommodation and assistance for victims of violence, measures to prevent violence in sport, and the nationwide roll-out of a tool for reporting violence and hate crimes. Publication National Action Plan to combat hate crimes against LGBTIQ persons 2026 – 2030 PDF 918.45 kB 28 January 2026 About us The Federal Office for Gender Equality (FOGE) promotes gender equality in all areas of life and is committed to eliminating discrimination. EBG Stay informed Youtube LinkedIn Additional information Contact Publications Media releases Impressum Terms and conditions Accessibility