Human rights group reports Chechen forces coercing detained gay men into military service, with at least seven sent to frontlines in Ukraine — The Insider Reports Analytics Investigations OIL 104.38 USD 84.34 EUR 95.87 Donate Русский РУ We depend on contributions from readers like you Sign up for regular contributions 1221 News Human rights group reports Chechen forces coercing detained gay men into military service, with at least seven sent to frontlines in Ukraine The Insider September 4, 2024 at 05:36 PM Cover photo: A serviceman listens to Ramzan Kadyrov, the leader of Russia's Chechen Republic, as he addresses troops in Grozny, the regional capital of Chechnya, on March 29, 2022 / Source: AP Photo Security forces in Chechnya are forcibly sending detained homosexual men to Ukraine by blackmailing them into “volunteering” for the frontlines, according to a report from the human rights group NC SOS («СК СОС»). The human rights activists have reported at least seven such cases, with one of the men sent to the front already having been killed. SK SOS reports that these forced conscription methods began even before Sept. 21, 2022, when Vladimir Putin announced “partial mobilization” into the Russian army across the country. In early September of that year, six men in Chechnya were detained on suspicion of being homosexual. They were threatened with fabricated criminal charges and warned they would be sent to pre-trial detention, where their orientation would be revealed to fellow inmates, according to the human rights group. The detainees were given the choice of paying a ransom or volunteering for the war in Ukraine. Three of the men were forced to become “volunteers,” as the ransom amount — 1.5 million rubles (over $17,000) — was unaffordable for their families. One of these men was reportedly killed in action, as per NC SOS . Detentions continued into the following year: in 2023, during yet another law enforcement raid in Chechnya, several members of the LGBTQ+ community were arrested. The women among them were released to their families later that evening, while four men were forcibly sent to Ukraine. Their fate remains unknown. NC SOS («СК СОС», lit. “North Caucasus SOS”) is a crisis group established in 2021 that provides assistance to LGBTQ+ individuals and victims of domestic violence in the North Caucasus — particularly those facing life-threatening persecution, discrimination, and abuse. The organization helps people flee dangerous regions, seek asylum, or relocate abroad. In recent years, SK SOS has become known for its efforts to protect LGBTQ+ individuals from abuse by Chechen authorities, including forced conscription into military service. SEE ALSO Chechen singer Zelimkhan Bakayev murdered by security forces as his homosexuality “offended” Ramzan Kadyrov, reports NC SOS crisis group July 25, 2023 LGBTQ+ people detail torture methods used by Chechen police, reports NC SOS crisis group August 10, 2023 Chechen special forces commander claims his forces “narrowly missed” Ukrainian troops in Russia’s Kursk Region — and avoided engaging them August 8, 2024 Video shows Chechen special forces fighters captured during Ukrainian incursion into Russia’s Kursk Region August 12, 2024 We depend on contributions from readers like you Sign up for regular contributions Another way to support us Add The Insider as a preferred source on Google and our reporting will show up in your Top Stories more often. Every reader who chooses The Insider helps show Google that our journalism matters. Want to share it? Publication: “ Human rights group reports Chechen forces coercing detained gay men into military service, with at least seven sent to frontlines in Ukraine ” Popular Unraveling Havana Syndrome: New evidence links the GRU's assassination Unit 29155 to mysterious attacks on U.S. officials and their families Lost in translation: How Russia’s new elite hit squad was compromised by an idiotic lapse in tradecraft The Czech illegals: Husband and wife outed as GRU spies aiding bombings and poisonings across Europe A most wanted man: Fugitive Wirecard COO Jan Marsalek exposed as decade-long GRU spy The Lab: How FSB chemical weapons experts tried to poison Alexei Navalny Subscribe to our Sunday Digest By subscribing, you agree to The Insider's Terms of Service and Privacy Policy , as well as Google's reCAPTCHA terms ( Privacy Policy , Terms of Service ). About the project User agreement Privacy policy Follow Us: 18+ 2026 The Insider News Investigations ECONOMICS Antifake SOCIETY OPINION CORRUPTION POLITICS Confession History Books Investigation Topics Fakesperts Subscribe to our Sunday Digest Subscribe to RSS Feed Follow Us: About the project