Iran | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Iran At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? No Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? No Legal Gender Recognition Possible? No LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? No Last Update: March 12, 2026 Iran criminalizes same-sex sexual relations with a maximum penalty of death. Iran allows transgender people who have undergone gender-affirming surgery to change their legal gender markers, but transgender Iranians are still subject to violence, discrimination , social rejection, and harassment. Iran has strict censorship laws that are used to ban LGBTIQ-related media and communications. The UN’s Independent International Fact-Finding Mission on the Islamic Republic of Iran reported in March 2025 that LGBTQ+ people are subjected to “discriminatory public statements by officials, at the highest levels.” During protests that were sparked by the death of Mahsa Amini in 2022, LGBTIQ people also joined calls demanding rights and freedoms. Although this caused a political backlash, it also strengthened the visibility of LGBTIQ movements in Iran. The fact-finding mission also found that LGBTQ+ people arrested in the context of the protest were subjected to “dehumanising insults, threats and treatment amounting to torture,” and that these violations may constitute gender persecution . In 2025, Iran continued to exhibit severe restrictions on fundamental rights, with authorities systematically repressing dissent, political activism, and civil society. Iranian authorities continued to target women human rights defenders, ethnic and religious minorities, and families of victims of previous anti-government protests, while arbitrarily arresting activists, students, journalists, and lawyers. Executions remained alarmingly high , including for vague national security offenses, crimes committed as minors, and nonviolent acts. Iranian authorities continue to systematically discriminate against women and girls, treating them as second-class citizens in marriage, divorce, custody, employment, and political participation. Compulsory veiling laws were strictly enforced through digital surveillance, harassment, imprisonment, flogging, and denial of education and public services. At the same time, activists and lawyers advocating for LGBTIQ people’s rights face censorship, harassment, and arbitrary arrest by the Islamic Republic. Iranian authorities often refer to vague laws on “morality” or “national security” to silence dissent and target individuals who promote the rights of sexual and gender minorities. In February 2024, Iranian authorities arrested Elham Choubdar , a 26-year-old LGBTIQ human rights activist in Urmia (West Azerbaijan province), and sentenced her to three years’ imprisonment. Choubdar was initially sentenced to death on charges of “corruption on earth by propagation of homosexuality,” “promotion of Christianity,” and “collaboration with opposition parties” in September 2023. However, the Supreme Court of Iran overturned the death sentence, and she was temporarily released on bail before receiving the February 2024 sentence. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International