Hong Kong rules transgender people need surgery to change legal gender | PinkNews About Us Advertise Work with us Login Register Latest News View all UK US World Health Politics Sport Business Culture View all TV Film Celebrity Drag Theatre Music Gaming Lifestyle View all Beauty Careers Fashion Relationships Travel Shopping View all Deals Recommended Fashion & Beauty Tickets Video View all News & Politics Entertainment Lifestyle Discover Trans Awareness Week Drag Race Explainers The Queer Agenda Toggle menu Account Register Login Current Affairs Hong Kong rules transgender people need surgery to change legal gender Feb 01 2019 Written by Josh Jackman Share Save for later Comment The ruling was handed down on February 1 (XAUME OLLEROS/AFP/Getty) The High Court of Hong Kong has ruled against three trans people who wanted to change their legal gender without undergoing confirmation surgery. The applicants, who are known as Henry Tse, Q and R, were informed of the decision on Friday (February 1). They have all been legally recognised as men by the British government but are unable to get their gender changed on Hong Kong ID cards. Judge Thomas Au said that full gender confirmation surgery was the “only objectively ascertainable criterion” in deciding a person’s gender, the Hong Kong Free Press newspaper has reported. Lawyers for the three men said they would appeal the ruling, telling Hong Kong newspaper the South China Morning Post that Judge Au’s requirement for the men to have genital surgery before changing their legal gender was “out of proportion.” One of the applicants, Henry Tse (not pictured), said: “I am a bit disappointed, although I am not surprised” (PHILIPPE LOPEZ/AFP/Getty) In response to the ruling, Tse said: “I am a bit disappointed, although I am not surprised.” The three men, who have had their breasts removed and undergone hormone therapy, achieved their legal gender change in Britain by proving they had suffered from gender dysphoria , lived as their gender for two years and intend to continue doing so. Hong Kong judge explains trans ruling In contrast to British laws, Hong Kong still requires full confirmation surgery before a trans person can officially be recognised as their gender. The judge said anything less than this would constitute “self-definition.” In his 59-page judgment, Judge Au rejected the idea of switching to a system of self-identification, which trans activists all over the world continue to campaign for . “Leaving it up to the individual cannot be a workable rule as it leads to uncertainty and arbitrariness, and in effect there would be no rule as a change of gender entry can be made simply by the person declaring so ,” he said. “No-one should be forced to undergo gender-affirming surgery in order to have their gender legally recognised.” — Amnesty International Hong Kong director Man-kei Tam The Hong Kong judge wrote that this decision should not be viewed as the government forcing trans people to undergo gender confirmation surgery, because anyone who gets the surgery has to give their consent. Judge Au also decided that the government’s policy did not discriminate against trans people, because they had a path to achieving a legal gender change . Gender confirmation surgeries vary drastically in price depending on the procedure needed, but can cost patients tens of thousands of pounds. Many trans people in the UK and US have resorted to crowdfunding to cover their expenses. Hong Kong ruling on trans rights prompts dismay from activists Man-kei Tam, director of Amnesty International Hong Kong, said that the judgment was “a blow for the recognition of transgender people.” “It is a missed opportunity to address the discrimination transgender people in Hong Kong face,” he continued. “No-one should be forced to undergo gender-affirming surgery in order to have their gender legally recognised. We urge the government to do the right thing and end this discriminatory and highly-intrusive policy irrespective of today’s ruling. “The government should also swiftly introduce comprehensive legislation against discrimination on the grounds of sexual orientation, gender identity or intersex status.” More: Asia Asia court gender confirmation surgery Hong Kong Law Trans Transgender Queer News. Straight Up. The LGBTQ+ stories you don’t want to miss, delivered to your inbox daily. Email address required Must be valid email Register By registering you agree to our Privacy Policy Thanks for registering! You can update your email subscriptions at any time in the My profile section of your account. Dec 01 2023 16 TV stars you grew up watching who later came out as LGBTQ+ Related articles Asia Sep 11 2025 Human Rights groups slam Hong Kong lawmakers for rejecting gay rights bill: ‘Alarming disdain’ Asia Jul 23 2025 Trans women have right to use women’s bathrooms, rules Hong Kong judge Asia Jul 10 2025 Hong Kong to introduce same-sex partnerships bill UK May 26 2025 Nicola Sturgeon says law must ‘change’ to support trans people after Supreme Court ruling US May 07 2025 US Supreme Court rules trans people can be banned from military Latest News Previous Next Celebrity Sep 25 Trans influencer calls out Nikki Glaser for stand-up joke about what’s ‘in her pants’ Culture Sep 25 Trans pro wrestling trailblazer Gisele Shaw signs exclusive NWA contract Bisexual Sep 25 The Traitors star Freddie Fraser’s mum’s emotional response to his coming out Celebrity Sep 25 Lili Reinhart says Hollywood ‘too afraid’ to greenlight lesbian vampire project Celebrity Sep 25 Carly Rae Jepsen describes moment Heated Rivalry inspired her son’s name Celebrity Sep 25 John Green ‘heartbroken’ for trans Harry Potter fans as he talks JK Rowling Current Affairs Sep 25 JD Vance claims James Talarico has a “weird obsession with children in drag” News Sep 25 Susan Sarandon, Hannah Einbinder and Caleb Hearon detained outside UN after protesting Netanyahu What to buy now Previous Next Fashion Mar 27 Connor Ives and MAC team up to re-release the iconic ‘Protect The Dolls’ t-shirt Music Mar 12 The Pussycat Dolls confirm reunion with new single and tour – how to get tickets Music Jan 23 A full guide to the 2026 Harry Styles Together, Together tour including dates and presale info Shopping Nov 24 2025 Ten truly awesome Christmas gifts you can buy to support queer-owned businesses Trans Sep 09 2025 Lush creates ‘luxurious’ trans flag bath bomb to support trans charities Tickets Jun 25 2025 Dolly Parton announces mini Las Vegas residency after wrapping her last tour almost a decade ago Shopping May 15 2025 LEGO celebrates late gay icon Keith Haring with new art set: ‘Want this so bad’ Music Apr 18 2025 Primavera Sound’s most iconic queer performances, from Troye Sivan to Ethel Cain Exclusive Previous Next Exclusive Sep 11 Ania Magliano talks SNL UK season two and anti-LGBTQ voices in comedy: ‘We do edgy in the right way’ Exclusive Sep 11 Elliot Tuttle on Blue Film’s personal inspiration, rejection and taboo: ‘It’s about loneliness’ Exclusive Sep 09 OF star Andy Lee on love for gay fans, ‘poisonous’ creators and ‘harmful’ stunts: ‘Gay men lift me up every day’ Exclusive Sep 07 Real Housewives of London spill the tea: ‘She’d go to the opening of a packet of crisps’ Opinion Sep 04 Katseye in London: A showcase of real talent deserving of the deafening screams Exclusive Sep 02 Adrian Chiarella and Joe Bird on tackling conversion therapy in gay horror Leviticus Exclusive Aug 21 Sziget Festival drag and circus troupe want audiences to feel like family Exclusive Aug 20 Gay wrestler Anthony Bowens says Heated Rivalry shows authentic life of closeted athletes Register to save articles and more. It'll only take a minute and it's free. JOIN US TODAY! Already have an account? Log in here "/> Download the PinkNews app Award winning LGBTQ+ journalism About us Editorial Policy Contact us Advertise Work for us Terms and conditions Privacy policy Privacy manager Privacy Manager