Senegal: 15 years in prison for being LGBT ? Now Reading In Senegal, anti-LGBT forces seek longer prison time for gay sex Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate In Senegal, anti-LGBT forces seek longer prison time for gay sex by Moïse Manoël-Florisse July 16, 2024 Moïse Manoël-Florisse Moïse Manoël-Florisse, is an African-Caribbean online journalist keeping an eye… Read Next Trans woman brutally murdered in Jashore, Bangladesh Homophobes want 15-year prison sentences rather than the current 5-year penalty. Since 2020, Senegal has been debating the effectiveness of its repression of homosexuality . Abuses of all kinds against LGBT+ people are commonplace in the West African nation, which current imposes prison sentences of up to five years for consensual same-sex intimacy. A further outburst of homophobia came in June, after new Prime Minister Ousmane Sonko alleged that homosexuality is tolerated in Senegal . In the confusion that followed Sonko’s remark, MP Cheikh Abdou Bara Dolly Mbacké, an ally of Sonko, proposed a new anti-homosexuality bill that would toughen Senegal’s already-strict penalties for homosexuality. Cheikh Abdou Bara Dolly Mbacké, (Instagram: @cheikh_abdou_mbacke_bara_dolly ) Making life worse for LGBT+ people The proposed provisions, which largely mirror those of an unsuccessful anti-LGBT initiative in January 2022 , which would have increased sentences to a ranage of 10 to 15 years’ imprisonment for “offences of bisexuality [including homosexuality] , transsexuality, necrophilia and zoophilia” , together with a fine of up to 5 million CFA francs ($8300 or €7600). In Senegal, the average monthly income was €146 in 2017. Under Senegal’s current law (Paragraph 3 of Article 319 of Law No. 65-60 of 21 July 1965), anyone who commits an “unnatural act with a person of his or her own sex” is liable to between one and five years’ imprisonment, as well as a fine of between 100,000 and 1,500,000 CFA francs ($166 to $2,500 / €150 to €2,200). Often-homophobic African context This legislative offensive comes at a time when 64 nations worldwide have laws against homosexuality. Senegal has now joined the company of other sub-Saharan African countries that are considering proposals to criminalize or increase penalties for homosexuality. For example, Burkina-Faso and the Democratic Republic of Congo are currently drafting legislation to punish homosexuality, while in Ghana , a law passed in February this year wiil take effect if the Ghana Supreme Court and president don’t block it. Uganda approved a tougher law against homosexuality in 2023. See Also Prominent Senegal citizens fall victim to anti-gay sweep Those nations’ actions contrast with the situation in most other parts of the world and in southern Africa. There, Namibia recently decriminalised homosexuality. As of mid-June, 30 of Africa’s 54 countries had anti-homosexuality law and 24 did not. In addition to Namibia, African nations that have decriminalized homosexuality included Gabon, Mauritius, Angola, Lesotho, Equatorial Guinea, Sao Tome and Principe, Seychelles, Botswana, and Mozambique all decriminalizing since 2012. However, parliaments in Ghana and Uganda, where gay sex was already illegal, approved tougher laws against homosexuality in 2023 and 2024. Moïse Manoël-Florisse July 16, 2024 The Latest Posts Turkey’s anti-LGBT crackdown expands; activists fight back Proposed Ukraine law would expand ban on anti-LGBTQ discrimination A third of LGBTQ groups say 2025’s drastic cuts will force them to close Bangladesh activists launch petition to end anti-LGBTQ discrimination Uganda’s ‘Not Free’ rating partly due to anti-LGBT laws Appeal to Indonesia to stop listing ‘LGBTQ culture’ as a national threat LGBTI+ rights activists in Turkey seek international support during crackdown Analysis: Cameroon’s anti-gay raids violated Cameroon’s own rules Ghana’s £10m deal is dead; gay fans won’t be lured to homophobic nation Turkey: 162 targeted in anti-LGBTQ+ raids Congo’s national prosecutor orders crackdown on homosexuality Previous Article Trans woman brutally murdered in Jashore, Bangladesh Next Article View Comments (2) Leave a Reply Cancel reply Your email address will not be published. Name * E-mail * Website Notify me of new posts by email. Δ Related Posts Haiti’s wary LGBT+ activists brace for first elections in 10 years Sierra Leone activists flee abroad as police hunt them Senegal Police admit using anal exams on female suspects Sierra Leone police hunt for 2 activists after anti-gay police raid Senegal women subjected to degrading anal examinations Are Senegal’s intersex people collateral victims of LGBTphobia? About The Erasing 76 Crimes news site covers the human toll of 66+ countries’ anti-gay laws and the struggle to repeal them. Member Members of the African Human Rights Media Network publish news articles and other media that educate readers about sexual minorities’ struggle for recognition of their human rights. Partner The St. Paul’s Foundation for International Reconciliation promotes LGBTQ+ rights through fact-based advocacy journalism and community projects. (California charity 80-0647355) © 2026 Erasing 76crimes. All rights reserved. Scroll To Top Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate Facebook Twitter Instagram Discover more from Erasing 76 Crimes Subscribe now to keep reading and get access to the full archive. Type your email… Subscribe Continue reading PRESS ESC TO CLOSE