Inter-American Court endorses same-sex marriage; Costa Rica reacts Facebook Instagram X Youtube Local News Latin America News Expat Life Travel Weather Weather Forecast Weather Guide Cafe Finder Sports Soccer Tennis Wildlife Tico Shop Classifieds Advertise Search Tico Times COSTA RICA\'S LEADING ENGLISH LANGUAGE NEWSPAPER Sign in Welcome! Log into your account your username your password Forgot your password? Get help Privacy Password recovery Recover your password your email A password will be e-mailed to you. No menu items! Sign in / Join Tico Times Since 1956 Search COSTA RICA'S LEADING ENGLISH LANGUAGE NEWSPAPER Local News Latin America News Expat Life Travel Weather Weather Forecast Weather Guide Cafe Finder Sports Soccer Tennis Wildlife Tico Shop Classifieds Advertise Today in Costa Rica Costa Rica Takes Growing Role in U.S. Deportation Program Fernández Says “I Am the President” Amid Backlash Over Tovar Firing Tovar Firing Leaves Costa Rica Without a Foreign Minister for UN Speech Costa Rica Fires Foreign Minister After Trump Meeting Dispute Costa Rican Lawmakers Reject Minute of Silence for Man Who Died in ICE Custody Home Gay marriage Inter-American Court endorses same-sex marriage; Costa Rica reacts Inter-American Court endorses same-sex marriage; Costa Rica reacts By The Tico Times January 10, 2018 Share Facebook X WhatsApp Email Lindsay Fendt/The Tico Times Gay rights activists and supporters of marriage equality celebrated in Costa Rica and throughout Latin America Tuesday night after the Inter-American Court of Human Rights ruled that all of its signatory countries must allow same-sex marriage. The court’s verdict is binding for most Latin American states – some of which still hold traditionalist views opposing such unions. Costa Rica’s legislation does not currently permit same-sex marriage, although there is recognition of economic and property rights for same-sex couples. The decision, published Tuesday, was in response to a motion lodged by Costa Rica in May 2016. It sent approximately 300 Costa Ricans to the Fuente de la Hispanidad in San Pedro, just east of the capital, to celebrate the ruling, according to the daily La Nacion . States that are signatories to the American Convention on Human Rights adopted in 1969 are required to adhere to the court’s rulings. Several of them already do recognize same-sex marriage, including Argentina, Brazil, Colombia and Uruguay. Others, such as Chile and Ecuador, currently recognize same-sex civil unions but not marriages. And some countries, such as Bolivia, Paraguay and Peru acknowledge neither. Venezuela, which does not recognize same-sex marriage, has withdrawn from the convention. The United States and Canada, although part of the Organization of American States that the Inter-American Court of Human Rights is part of, have not ratified the convention, but both accept same-sex marriages. The ruling from the Costa Rica-based court said gay married couples should have the same rights as heterosexual ones existing under each country’s laws. As such, it said it is inadmissible and discriminatory for a separate legal provision to be established just for gay marriages. The court acknowledged that some states would face institutional difficulties in bringing in the right for same-sex couples to marry, noting that often opposition was based on religious criteria; many Latin Americans identify as Catholic. But the court said that “in democratic societies, there should exist mutually peaceful coexistence between the secular and the religious,” with neither interfering with the other. How will the country’s presidential candidates react? La Nación consulted eight candidates, all of whom said they would respect the ruling with two exceptions: Mario Redondo of the Democratic Christian Alliance, and Fabricio Alvarado of the National Restoration Party. Edgardo Araya, the candidate representing the left-wing Broad Front party, published an exuberant video on Facebook . “This is a historic day for our nation,” he said. “Today we celebrate, at long last, the recognition of equal marriage in our country.” https://www.facebook.com/EdgardoArayaFA/videos/1837377992959081/ Trending Now Costa Rica Expands Yellow Fever Vaccine Rule to Eight More Countries Costa Ricans and legal residents planning trips to several parts of South America and the Caribbean need to check their vaccination records before heading... Read more Costa Rica Population Could Begin Shrinking Earlier Than Expected Costa Rica's population could begin shrinking earlier than previously expected as the number of children being born continues to fall faster than population experts... Read more Costa Rica Ranks Fifth in the World for Retirees in Global Relocation Index Costa Rica ranks 20th out of 192 countries and territories in the 2026 Global Relocation Index, and fifth in the world for retirees, according... Read more Demolished Pavones Restaurant owner releases book about the experience For nearly two decades, Nicholas Cena has called Pavones, Costa Rica, home. What began as a visit to see his sister eventually became a... Read more Costa Rica Mayor Asks Who Allowed Building at Protected Playa Blanca Garabito's mayor questions how roads and homes were built at Playa Blanca, protected as a marine wetland since 1994. Read more Montezuma or Santa Teresa? Choosing Your Corner of Costa Rica’s Nicoya Peninsula Every week someone asks us the same question. Should we be looking at Montezuma or Santa Teresa? It sounds like a choice between two... Read more Costa Rica’s Former Simón Bolívar Zoo Opens for Coffee Day San José residents will get another chance to walk the grounds of the former Simón Bolívar Zoo on Saturday, October 3, when the site... Read more Costa Rica Fires Foreign Minister After Trump Meeting Dispute President Laura Fernández fired Foreign Minister Manuel Tovar today after saying he failed to tell her about a high-level security meeting with U.S. President... Read more OAS Countries Seek October Meeting to Consider Measures Against Nicaragua A group of five countries in the Organization of American States (OAS) is proposing that the region’s foreign ministers meet on October 2 to... Read more The Tico Times Share Facebook X WhatsApp Email 🌴 The Weekly Pura Vida Costa Rica, Once a Week The week's top stories, weather & insider tips — delivered every Sunday. One email, zero clutter. 🔒 Free. No spam. Unsubscribe anytime. San José Guanacaste Limón Puntarenas Loading… Feels like Humidity Wind Full Costa Rica Forecast → Data: OpenWeatherMap Latest News from Costa Rica Costa Rica Expands Yellow Fever Vaccine Rule to Eight More Countries September 27, 2026 Demolished Pavones Restaurant owner releases book about the experience September 27, 2026 Who is behind Costa Rica’s proposed AI data centers? September 27, 2026 Costa Rica’s Laguna Río Cuarto Loses Visitor Services September 27, 2026 Three Missing After Being Swept Away at Tarrazú Waterfall and Guanacaste Beach September 26, 2026 Dollar Rebounds From Record Low but Year-End Could Favor the Colón Again September 26, 2026 Used-Car Importers Take Costa Rica’s New Vehicle Tax Formula to Court September 26, 2026 © 2026 The Tico Times Facebook Facebook Instagram Instagram RSS RSS X X Youtube Youtube Services Classifieds Costa Rica Advertising Write For Us RSS Feed Support About Us Corrections Policy Editorial Ethics Policy Privacy Terms of Service