New guidance on single-sex spaces comes into force Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Home News US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business World of Business Technology of Business NYSE Opening Bell Technology Artificial Intelligence Intelligence Revolution AI v the Mind Tech Now Health Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList To the Ends of the Earth Earth Science Natural Wonders Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcast Categories Radio Audio FAQs Video BBC Maestro Discover the World Live Live News Live Sport Site search Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters New guidance on single-sex spaces comes into force 5 August 2026 Share Save Add as preferred on Google Alison Holt , Social affairs editor and James Melley , Senior Social Affairs Producer Getty Images EHRC code covers spaces open to the public in England, Wales and Scotland Single-sex spaces open to the public, such as toilets and changing rooms, should be organised based on biological sex, according to official guidance that has come into force. The code, published by Equality and Human Rights Commission (EHRC), says trans people should use either gender-neutral facilities or the ones that match their biological sex, in places such as gym changing rooms or rape crisis centres. The guidance was published in June but is now in place in England, Wales and Scotland - despite opposition among some MPs. It comes 16 months after the UK Supreme Court ruled "sex" in equality law means "biological sex" rather than the gender someone identifies as. Trans-rights campaigners have called the guidance unworkable, but groups that campaign for sex-based rights welcome the clarity it brings. The guidance from the EHRC, the equality watchdog for England, Scotland and Wales, provides practical advice for services, public bodies and associations on how they should interpret the 2010 Equality Act. It applies to organisations as diverse as cafes, leisure centres, public toilets, domestic violence shelters, bowls clubs and many more. The code says where it is proportionate for facilities, such as public toilets and changing rooms, or services like a rape crisis centre, to be single sex then only those of the same biological sex should use them. This means, for instance, a trans woman, a person born a biological male who identifies as a woman, should not use women-only facilities. And a trans man should not use men only facilities. But the code also says it could amount to discrimination against a transgender person if they were forced to use services related to their biological sex. It says gender-neutral spaces are an alternative. The Equality Act provides protections for people on the grounds of both biological sex and gender reassignment. Transgender people argue they should be able to use services that align with the way they identify and live their life, rather than their biological sex. In response, campaigners including some women's and gay rights groups say this undermines sex-based protections, particularly for women. It is the tension between these two sets of rights that led to both the Supreme Court ruling in April 2025 and the publication of this updated guidance. It suggests legal action on how the code is put into practice is likely. Both from trans-rights groups who think the guidance itself is wrong and from sex-based rights groups who will want to challenge any organisations who they believe are not following the code. What does trans mean and why is there a debate about transgender people's rights? The draft EHRC code was sent to Bridget Phillipson, the equalities minister, to approve in September 2025. An amendment was made in June this year. Once it was approved, MPs and members of the House of Lords had the opportunity to vote for a debate on the code, but despite 167 MPs signing a motion calling for the draft guidelines to be scrapped it was not debated. Many organisations have already made changes they say comply with the law and are in line with the code, such as the Women's Institute and Girl Guiding, which had already said membership was for females. But the deputy leader of Lambeth Council in London says the authority may refuse to implement the guidance, if advised it's lawful to do so. Green Party Councillor Natalie Kane told the Today programme: "For us it's about people accessing services, and we're worried people won't feel they can". But the chair of the EHRC, Dr Mary Ann Stephenson, says: "You can't ignore the guidance any more than you can ignore the law". She says the Equality Act already has safeguards in place, adding: "trans people are protected against discrimination and harassment, and they shouldn't be left in a position where there aren't services for them". Trans-rights activists have strongly opposed the code, saying it made trans people's lives more difficult. Alexandra Parmar-Yee, director at Trans+ Solidarity Alliance, said: "Trans people will be shut out of the services they need, made to feel unwelcome and unsafe in public spaces. Our lives will feel smaller and more precarious." However, gender critical campaign groups argue the code is important in helping organisations comply with the law. Maya Forstater, of sex-based rights charity Sex Matters, said: "The law is clear and the code is practical, giving many examples that apply to everyday services.” Northern Ireland relies on different equality legislation and is currently considering the impact the Supreme Court ruling has on it. Transgender people Women's rights Related Senedd presiding officer accuses Reform MS of offensive comments in Welsh Gender Service debate Crisis-hit gender service cancelled 60 surgeries this year, Welsh health minister says Doctor 'enraged' over NHS transgender ward policy More from the BBC 3 days ago 'Why we flushed away Dragons' Den investment' "Women's urinals being discussed on the national stage is really revolutionary", says PEEQUAL founder. 3 days ago 4 days ago Sandie Peggie says union did not take her case seriously The nurse claims the Royal College of Nursing failed to properly support and advise her after she was suspended. 4 days ago 17 Sept 2026 'My mother apologised': A survivor's journey after genital mutilation Sara Kahsai was 29 when she found out she had FGM as a baby. 17 Sept 2026 3 Sept 2026 Watch: Gloria Steinem dedicated her life to fight for women's equality The feminist icon who became leader of the women's liberation movement in the US died on Wednesday at the age of 92, according to her foundation. 3 Sept 2026 3 Sept 2026 Gloria Steinem talks about her legacy in 2023 BBC interview The writer and activist who was an icon of the US's feminist movement has died aged 92, her foundation says. 3 Sept 2026 British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages The BBC is in multiple languages Read the BBC In your own language BBC News Brasil BBC News Mundo (Spanish) BBC News မြန်မာ (Burmese) BBC News 中文 (Chinese) BBC News Indonesia BBC News 코리아 (Korean) BBC News ไทย (Thai) BBC News Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese) BBC News Azərbaycanca (Azeri) BBC News Magyarul (Hungarian) BBC News Кыргыз Кызматы (Kyrgyz) BBC News Polska (Polish) BBC News România (Romanian) BBC News Русская служба (Russian) BBC News na srpskom (Serbian) BBC News Україна (Ukrainian) BBC News O'zbek (Uzbek) BBC News عربي (Arabic) BBC News فارسی (Persian) BBC News Türkçe (Turkish) BBC News বাংলা (Bengali) BBC News دری (Dari) BBC News ગુજરાતી (Gujarati) BBC News हिन्दी (Hindi) BBC News मराठी (Marathi) BBC News नेपाली (Nepali) BBC News සිංහල (Sinhala) BBC News ਪੰਜਾਬੀ (Punjabi) BBC News Afaan Oromoo BBC News አማርኛ (Amharic) BBC News Afrique (French) BBC News Hausa BBC News Gaelic NAIDHEACHDAN BBC News Ìgbò BBC News Japanese 日本語 BBC News Gahuza BBC News Pidgin BBC News Somali BBC News Swahili BBC News தமிழ் (Tamil) BBC News తెలుగు (Telugu) BBC News ትግርኛ (Tigrinya) BBC News اردو (Urdu) BBC News Yorùbá BBC News World Service Follow BBC on: Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Do not share or sell my info Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us BBC.com Help & FAQs Content Index Set Preferred Source Copyright 2026 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.