Swedish gender recognition law takes effect, but medical barriers remain - TGEU - Trans Europe and Central AsiaTGEU – Trans Europe and Central Asia Toggle menu en RU Change font size Close Members EN RU search Legal gender recognition Health and depathologisation Protection from violence and hate Resilience against the anti-gender movement see all topics Trans Rights Index & Map Trans Day of Remembrance Trans Murder Monitoring Trans Health Map Latest news Publications Our members Contact us About TGEU Donate share July 16, 2025 · 2 min read Swedish gender recognition law takes effect, but medical barriers remain article legal gender recognition health & depathologisation legal gender recognition self-determination As of 1 July 2025, Sweden’s new Legal Gender Recognition Act has officially come into force. The reform simplifies the legal gender recognition procedure but falls short of a full self-determination model. The new Swedish proposal separates the requirements for changing one’s legal gender marker in identity documents from accessing gender-affirming surgery, which is welcome. However, a trans person is still required to be medically examined and a decision made by the National Board of Health and Welfare as to who is entitled to access the change. This continues to pathologise trans people as medically ill, which violates human rights . However, the reform simplifies legal gender changes by allowing, for example, digital healthcare consultations instead of lengthy medical assessments. The proposal also lowers the age limit from the current 18 to 16 years old. For those under 16, parental consent is still required. After attempting to delay the law, the Christian Democrats and right-wing opposition have now vowed to mobilise efforts to reverse it Calls to action TGEU urges the Swedish government to: Ensure procedures are based on self-determination only Remove the requirement for a medical examination and all medicalised aspects of the procedure to access legal gender recognition; and remove existing age limits. More info Sweden Proposes Legal Gender Recognition Reform Without Self-determination | TGEU New gender recognition act: a step in the right direction | RFSL Support our work We work across Europe and Central Asia to advance trans rights, build strong communities, and drive change through research, advocacy, and community-building. Your donation helps us continue this vital work — defending trans lives, amplifying trans voices, and advocating for justice every day. donate now Connect with us on social Facebook Instagram X Youtube LinkedIn Subscribe to our newsletter Get our latest publications and news about trans rights in Europe and Central Asia directly in your inbox. subscribe Advocacy and research Topics Publications and resources Trans Rights Index & Map Trans Murder Monitoring Trans Health Map About About us Our work with members Our team Work with us Contact us Impressum Get involved Donate Our members Become a Member Other languages Español Português Deutsch Hrvatski, Bosanski, Crnogorski, Srpski Partners Funders © Copyright 2026 TGEU Powered by SOLOS Privacy Policy Manage Consent To provide the best experiences, we use technologies like cookies to store and/or access device information. Consenting to these technologies will allow us to process data such as browsing behavior or unique IDs on this site. Not consenting or withdrawing consent, may adversely affect certain features and functions. Functional Functional Always active The technical storage or access is strictly necessary for the legitimate purpose of enabling the use of a specific service explicitly requested by the subscriber or user, or for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission of a communication over an electronic communications network. Preferences Preferences The technical storage or access is necessary for the legitimate purpose of storing preferences that are not requested by the subscriber or user. Statistics Statistics The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for statistical purposes. The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for anonymous statistical purposes. Without a subpoena, voluntary compliance on the part of your Internet Service Provider, or additional records from a third party, information stored or retrieved for this purpose alone cannot usually be used to identify you. Marketing Marketing The technical storage or access is required to create user profiles to send advertising, or to track the user on a website or across several websites for similar marketing purposes. Manage options Manage services Manage {vendor_count} vendors Read more about these purposes Accept Deny View preferences Save preferences View preferences {title} {title} {title} Manage consent