EN BM 中文 TA Sign In Subscribe Lifetime ACTIVE INACTIVE EXPIRED Registered on: Renews on: Expires on: ACTIVE INACTIVE EXPIRED Subscribe Renew Extend Subscription Settings Contact Support Sign Out Latest Videos Opinions Yoursay Featured Kini News Lab KiniGuide Sustainability Events Collab Content TopTech About Our Team Privacy Policy Terms of Service Advertise with us Careers Reach us Email WhatsApp File a complaint Address Sign In Subscribe EN BM 中文 TA Latest Videos Opinions Yoursay Featured Kini News Lab KiniGuide Sustainability Events Collab Content TopTech About Our Team Privacy Policy Terms of Service Advertise with us Careers Reach us Email WhatsApp File a complaint Address EN BM 中文 TA MOST COMMENTED MOST READ SNAPSHOT | N Sembilan Harapan urges MB to have audience with ruler; Nga 'adopts' 11 Teluk Intan B40 pupils 10h ago Legal experts propose royal tribunal, emergency rule to solve N Sembilan crisis 18h ago Don't hide behind excuses, explain why you signed proclamation, ex-N Sembilan MB tells Ismail 14h ago Lawyer says Najib in RM50m bind - not enough personal funds, torn over raising public money 15h ago M'sian Bar again challenges Najib pardon, this time over house arrest 8h ago ANNOUNCEMENT 90 startups took centre stage at Selangor Triple Accelerator Showcase Days Three days of live pitching, product showcases and industry engagement have narrowed 90 startups down to 24 finalists heading to the Grand Final Demo Day this October. News ✕ K'tan trans woman first to be charged over surgery for sex reassignment N Faizal Ghazali Published: Feb 4, 2026 10:45 AM | Updated: Feb 4, 2026 12:33 PM Kelantan has recorded its first prosecution for the offence of gender transition under the Syariah Criminal Code Enactment (I) 2019, since the law was gazetted in 2020. The case is believed to also be the first of its kind in the country, where sex reassignment surgery is prohibited for Muslims, with an exception for intersex people. Kelantan has recorded its first prosecution for the offence of gender transition under the Syariah Criminal Code Enactment (I) 2019, since the law was gazetted in 2020. The case is also believed to be the first of its kind in the country, where sex reassignment surgery is prohibited for Muslims, with an exception for intersex people. “To our knowledge, yes, because we have been monitoring the case in Kelantan. We have not seen other cases. This is the first case,” Justice For Sisters (JFS) co-founder Thilaga Sulathireh told Malaysiakini . “Out of all the states, Kelantan is the only one that has this provision,” she said, referring to the enactment criminalising sex reassignment surgery. The case involving a trans woman was heard at the Kelantan Syariah Court in Kota Bharu last month. According to a source privy to the development, the Kelantan Islamic Affairs Department (Jaheaik) had arrested the trans woman early this year, during an operation targeting an event involving a group of transgender individuals. “Following the arrest, prosecution was initiated against the suspect at the Kelantan Syariah Court, on charges of sex change. “It is understood that it is still at the case management stage after the accused pleaded not guilty to the charge,” the source who requested anonymity told Malaysiakini . It is learnt that the charge was framed under Section 18 of the Syariah Criminal Code Enactment (I) 2019, which criminalises changing one’s own gender, or that of another person. Under the law, the offence carries a fine not exceeding RM3,000 or imprisonment for a term not exceeding two years, or both. When contacted, the accused declined to comment. Exco: Case details can’t be disclosed Kelantan Islamic Development, Da’wah, Information and Regional Relations executive councillor Asri Daud said his office also could not publicly disclose details of the case. “I do not have complete information, and there are issues that cannot be openly disclosed. In this matter, I need to safeguard all parties who are facing action,” he said when contacted. The case was also not publicised. Thilaga stressed that laws criminalising gender transition have significant negative effects on transgender individuals in expressing their identity. “Such laws create a larger space for sexual harassment, violations of privacy, personal integrity, and bodily autonomy. “It also criminalises any kind of healthcare service providers, and trans-specific healthcare to exist at the state level,” she said. Legal challenges Kelantan, known as the “Veranda of Mecca”, regards issues relating to the LGBTQ+ community as taboo and highly sensitive. In April 1983, the National Fatwa Council ruled that changing genders is forbidden under Islamic law. The council clarified that a person born male remains legally male, and a person born female remains legally female, even after undergoing sex reassignment surgery. Men are also prohibited from wearing women’s clothing. In 2014, however, the Court of Appeal delivered a landmark ruling recognising the rights of transgender individuals who suffer from gender dysphoria and who dress and present as women. Three men - Juzaili Khamis, Syukor Jani, and Wan Fairol Wan Ismail, who were at the time between their late 20s and 30 - had challenged the constitutionality of Section 66 on Feb 2, 2011. Under the provision, they faced up to six months’ imprisonment and a fine of up to RM1,000. They named the Negeri Sembilan government, the state’s Islamic Affairs Department and its director, the syariah enforcement chief, and the prosecution chief as respondents. Judge Hishamudin Yunus ruled that Section 66 of the Syariah Criminal (Negeri Sembilan) Enactment 1992 – which penalises Muslim men for posing as women – was inconsistent with the Federal Constitution. The court declared Section 66 void. However, in 2015, the Federal Court set aside the Court of Appeal and High Court decisions on technical grounds. This meant Section 66 of the Negeri Sembilan Syariah Offences Enactment, which prohibits men from cross-dressing, remained in force. Push for stricter laws The federal government has also indicated its intention to strengthen laws preventing sex reassignment. Ahmad Marzuk Shaary In 2021, then Deputy Minister in the Prime Minister’s Department (Religious Affairs) Ahmad Marzuk Shaary stated that gender change should be classified as a specific offence under syariah criminal law. READ MORE : PAS MP on LGBT: Bulls don't marry bulls, cows don't marry cows “There are two matters that I will ensure are included for consideration in amendments. “First, changing gender must be made a specific offence under syariah criminal law. “Second, social media content related to all behaviours that contradict one’s gender, including obscene, pornographic and repulsive content, should also be made a syariah offence committed online,” Harakahdaily reported him saying. Takiyuddin apologises to Mujahid over PAS' LGBT claim Use empathy when making movies on taboo subjects, filmmakers say Transgender author lauds efficient renewal of MyKad, passport LGBTQ+ folk face isolation, bullying amid PAS initiatives - group Shying from sex talk, M'sia uses tech in HIV/AIDS fight Malaysia joins critics of Paris 2024 Olympics opening ceremony 0 0 Related reports 6 Takiyuddin apologises to Mujahid over PAS' LGBT claim 30-12-2025 Use empathy when making movies on taboo subjects, filmmakers say 30-10-2025 Transgender author lauds efficient renewal of MyKad, passport 10-06-2025 LGBTQ+ folk face isolation, bullying amid PAS initiatives - group 28-05-2025 Shying from sex talk, M'sia uses tech in HIV/AIDS fight 12-12-2024 Malaysia joins critics of Paris 2024 Olympics opening ceremony 31-07-2024 View Comments 0 Comment Comments 0 By posting a comment, you agree to our Commenting Terms and Conditions as stipulated in full here. Do's and don'ts when posting comments in Malaysiakini TERMS & CONDITIONS Foul language, profanity, vulgarity, slanderous, personal attack, threatening, sexually-orientated comments or the use of any method of communication that may violate any law or create needless unpleasantness will not be tolerated. Antisocial behaviour such as "spamming" and "trolling" will be suspended. Violators run the risk of also being blocked permanently. REPORT VIOLATORS Please use the report feature that is available below each comment to flag offending comments for our moderators to take action. Do not take matters in your own hands to avoid unpleasant and unnecessary exchanges that may result in your own suspension or ban. NOTICE Our commenting system is still under development. We have taken note of feedback provided. Subscriber-only space: Are you a subscriber? Sign In Not yet a subscriber? Subscribe Submit for moderation 3200 characters remaining Pending comments 0 More Are you sure you want to delete this comment? This action cannot be undone. Cancel Delete Report this comment 500 characters remaining Cancel Submit report for moderation --> About Us Our Team Privacy Policy Terms of Service Advertise with Us Careers Archive Digital Network KiniTV FG Media RSS Feeds News Opinion Letters Contact Editorial editor@malaysiakini.com Contact Subscription/Tech Support +6017-323 0707 subscribe@malaysiakini.com Advertising advertise@malaysiakini.com advertise@fgmedia.my Mkini Dotcom Sdn Bhd (199901014818 / 489718-U) No. 9, Jalan 51/205A, Off Jalan Tandang, 46050 Petaling Jaya, Selangor Contact us Contact Editorial editor@malaysiakini.com Contact Subscription/Tech Support +603-7770 0017 subscribe@malaysiakini.com @Kini No. 9, Jalan 51/205A, Off Jalan Tandang, 46050 Petaling Jaya, Selangor