Guna Yala: The islands where women make the rules Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Home News US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business World of Business Technology of Business NYSE Opening Bell Technology Artificial Intelligence Intelligence Revolution AI v the Mind Tech Now Health Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList To the Ends of the Earth Earth Science Natural Wonders Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcast Categories Radio Audio FAQs Video BBC Maestro Discover the World Live Live News Live Sport Site search Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters Guna Yala: The islands where women make the rules 14 August 2018 Share Save Add as preferred on Google Egle Gerulaityte Features correspondent Paul Stewart Women in Guna Yala enjoy an elevated status (Credit: Paul Stewart) In the small indigenous territory of Guna Yala off Panama’s eastern coast, a flourishing ‘third gender’ community is defying stereotypes – and venerating women. Our Unique World Our Unique World explores distinctive subcultures around the globe in celebration of what makes us different. Check back each week in August and September to discover a new, unique world. As our old, rickety sailboat glides effortlessly over the calm waters of the Caribbean, I am overwhelmed by the feeling we’ve just arrived in paradise. Scattered across the turquoise blue waters, the tiny islands of glistening white sand, covered in palm trees and green coconuts, look too perfect to be real. This is Guna Yala, also known as San Blas: an archipelago off Panama’s eastern coast that contains more than 300 islands, 49 of which are inhabited by the indigenous Guna people. More than 50,000 strong, the Gunas still live as their ancestors did, dwelling in small wooden shacks covered with palm leaves, with logs smouldering in the fireplaces and hammocks representing the only furniture. Guna Yala is extraordinary in many ways: it is an autonomous indigenous territory, and its flag sports a black, left-facing swastika, said to represent the four directions and the creation of the world. But perhaps the most curious tradition in Guna Yala is its natural gender equality – and complete tolerance, if not celebration, of gender fluidity. Paul Stewart The Guna Yala archipelago off Panama’s eastern coast is inhabited by the indigenous Guna people (Credit: Paul Stewart) You may also be interested in: • The Turks who lost their language • The last guardians of a python spirit • The Kung Fu nuns of Nepal “My mother taught me how to make these beautiful molas , our traditional embroidered clothes,” Lisa said, showing me her amazing needlework. “Some of these represent birds and animals, but some are very powerful – they will protect you from evil spirits,” she added, smiling softly. For an onlooker like me, there isn't anything unusual about Lisa. Much like many other Guna women, she’s sitting in her small dug-out canoe and offering her beautiful handicrafts to tourist boats. Except Lisa was born a boy. In a society where women are the main food distributors, property owners and decision makers, boys may choose to become Omeggid, literally ‘like a woman’, where they act and work like other females in the community. This ‘third gender’ is a completely normal phenomenon on the islands. If a boy begins showing a tendency towards acting ‘female’, the family naturally accepts and allows him to grow up as such. Very often, Omeggid will learn a skill that is typically associated with women; for example, most Omeggid living on the islands become masters at crafting the most intricate molas. Nandín Solís García The ‘third gender’, or Omeggid, is a completely normal phenomenon on the islands (Credit: Nandín Solís García) Diego Madi Dias, an anthropologist and post-doctoral researcher at the University of Sao Paulo, lived among the Guna for more than two years and has seen first-hand that the powerful matriarchal figures in Guna culture are a major influence on the Guna men. “The Guna have taught me that children should have sufficient autonomy, as their ‘self’ comes from the heart, from within, and starts manifesting early. So if a male child starts showing a tendency toward being transgender, (s)he is not prevented to be himself,” he said. Their &lsquo;self&rsquo; comes from the heart, from within Nandín Solís García, a transgender health educator and LGBTQ rights activist in Panama City, originally from the Aggwanusadub and Yandub island communities of Guna Yala, told me that growing up as a gay, gender-fluid boy wasn’t difficult on the islands because she always had the support of her family, friends and community. It is mostly males that become transgender women – female transitions to male are extremely rare, but the latter would be equally accepted, she explained. “Historically, there were always transgender people among the Guna,” she said. In fact, being Omeggid in Guna Yala stems all the way back to Guna mythology. “There are important creation stories about the original leaders who brought the traditions, rules and guidelines for the Guna people to live by: a man named Ibeorgun, his sister Gigadyriai and his little brother Wigudun – a figure that belonged to what we would call the ‘third gender’,” Dias said, explaining that Wigudun is both female and male. Paul Stewart Diego Madi Dias: “If a male child starts showing a tendency toward being transgender, (s)he is not prevented to be himself” (Credit: Paul Stewart) Walking down the streets on Crab Island, one of the biggest communities in the touristic area of Guna Yala, I notice women everywhere. Dressed in beautifully embroidered traditional clothes, they’re working on their handicrafts, tending small shops and selling food and drinks. Contrary to many other Central American countries, Guna women seem more outgoing and chatty: striking up a conversation here is much easier than in the streets of Guatemalan or Nicaraguan villages. According to David, my guide on Crab Island, women in Guna Yala enjoy an elevated status. A traditional Guna wedding includes a ceremonial abduction of the groom, not the bride, and when a young man is married off, he moves into the bride’s home. From that point on, his work belongs to the woman’s family, and it’s the woman who decides whether her husband can share his fish, coconuts or plantains with his own parents or siblings. Even the partying here, David said, is done to honour women: the three most important celebrations in the Guna Yala islands are a girl's birth, her puberty and her marriage. The whole community gathers to drink chicha , a strong local beer, to celebrate girlhood and womanhood. During the puberty celebration, a girl’s septum is pierced and adorned with a golden ring. “Gold is treasure, so women wear gold to show how precious and valuable they are,” an elderly Guna woman told me, pointing at her own golden nose ring. Paul Stewart Women in Guna Yala enjoy an elevated status (Credit: Paul Stewart) Although men traditionally become fishermen, hunters, farmers or chiefs, women’s work is considered just as, or sometimes, more important. With tourism on the rise, the Gunas are beginning to earn money from sources other than their ancestral trades of collecting coconuts, diving for lobster, fishing and farming. Guna women can make a substantial income by selling intricately embroidered molas and winis (colourful bracelets made from glass beads). One mola can sell for $30-$50, whereas a man will only make $20 in a whole day spent cleaning the bottom of a visiting sailboat. I think masculinity is sometimes seen as difficult to achieve “I wouldn’t say Guna is a matriarchy, because while women make all the domestic decisions, they are rarely politicians or chiefs. Yet, the thing about the Guna is that there’s no hierarchy of the value of work. Fishing and hunting is considered work, but so is cooking or looking after children: the Gunas do not consider women’s labour to be ‘lesser work’, like we sometimes still do in the West. But because it’s the young man who moves into the young woman’s home, and because the woman becomes the distributor of food, I think masculinity is sometimes seen as difficult to achieve,” Dias said. David admits that his marriage had been arranged by his and his wife’s parents, and that he has little say over the property or the sharing of food in his home. “My wife decides… Women always decide,” he said, smiling, before hurrying off to prepare the chicha. Today, his daughter reaches puberty, and the whole of Crab Island will be celebrating. Paul Stewart Men traditionally become fishermen, hunters, farmers or chiefs, but women’s work is considered just as, if not more, important (Credit: Paul Stewart) But while women have a defined role in the Guna society, the Omeggid sometimes do not. “As more and more Gunas come into contact with Westernisation, we sadly begin to adopt the discriminatory practices towards diversity, towards LGBTQ people,” Garcia said. According to Garcia, many Omeggid leave Guna Yala for Panama City, looking for education or career opportunities. And while dreams come true for some, others fare much worse. “We have a big problem with HIV in the community. In Guna Yala, there is no sex education, and people simply don’t know about sexually transmitted diseases. As a result, many [men and] Omeggid people become infected with HIV in the cities, and then, unknowingly, bring it back to the Guna islands when they return home. Wigudun Galu [a non-governmental organisation] is working to prevent HIV infection and offer sex education to the Omeggid community,” she said. Paul Stewart Guna women can make a substantial income by selling intricately embroidered molas (Credit: Paul Stewart) But despite these issues, the Omeggid who stay in Guna Yala are thriving. Both on the bigger island communities and smaller, family-sized islets, they are omnipresent. Young Omeggid with long hair learn needlework from their mothers, and older Omeggid wearing headscarves sell molas or act as tour guides and translators for tourists. They are treated as equal members of Guna families and within the community. “I think, instead of only describing how the indigenous peoples are or how they live, anthropology should perhaps help us to examine our own traditions. Throughout ages, across continents and cultures, gender fluidity and the concept of a third gender consistently reappears: the hijras in India; the Meti in Nepal; the Fa’afafine in Samoa; the ‘two-spirit’ people in North America. They are not the exception, we are. Western tradition has constructed a scientific mythology on gender binarism. And it seems, at the end of the day, that gender isn’t so much about biology, hormones and science as it is about the expression of self and a personal, particular way of being in the world,” Dias said. They are not the exception, we are As Lisa pushes off our sailboat, her little canoe lolling in the shimmering blue sea, I can’t help but think that Guna Yala seems like a wonderfully alternative world of peace, tolerance and understanding – and that there’s a lot we could learn from this tiny archipelago community in the Caribbean. Our Unique World is a BBC Travel series that celebrates what makes us different and distinctive by exploring offbeat subcultures and obscure communities around the globe. Join more than three million BBC Travel fans by liking us on Facebook , or follow us on Twitter and Instagram . If you liked this story, sign up for the weekly bbc.com features newsletter called "If You Only Read 6 Things This Week". A handpicked selection of stories from BBC Future, Earth, Culture, Capital and Travel, delivered to your inbox every Friday. Cultural Traditions Watch AI is speeding up search for drugs to treat brain conditions AI is helping scientists identify existing drugs that could be repurposed to treat dementia and brain disorders. Tech Now Wall Street opens down as oil edges up Will McGough, of Prime Capital Financial, says consumer spending has been rising despite weak consumer sentiment. Opening Bell Stunning photographs of India's unique wildlife Follow wildlife photographer Kalyan Varma as he photographs the unique wildlife of India. Earth Nasdaq hits record high as AI stocks rally Ron Sanchez, of Fiduciary Trust International, says AI debates shouldn't impact markets in the short term. Opening Bell Watch a pride of lions team up for a deadly hunt at night Wildlife photographer Gordon Buchanon gets a front-row seat to African lions' stealthy nighttime ambush. BBC Select The growing climate challenge facing Spain From agriculture to tourism, Spain's economy is adapting to a hotter and less predictable future. World of Business US markets open steady after turbulent week Joy Yang of MarketVector Indexes says traders are calm about the volatility of US markets. Opening Bell How to slash bills and emissions at home Most homeowners want more efficient houses, but is it better to buy new or retrofit your existing home? Fixing the Planet Smart steps to waste less food and save money too Chef and self-titled 'food waste disruptor' Martin Odell explores simple ways to rethink food waste. Fixing the Planet Nature's greatest weapon in the fight against climate change Seagrass may look unassuming, but these underwater meadows play a powerful role in tackling climate change. Fixing the Planet Can doing less to your garden do more for the planet? By giving nature more space to do its own thing, we can help boost biodiversity and create healthier ecosystems. Fixing the Planet The unexpected ingredient hidden on Poland's shoreline On Poland's coast, a local chef explains how a famous Baltic treasure is part of a centuries-old food tradition. The Travel Show US markets remain on edge as oil ticks down Ed Moya, of AlphaSense, believes that markets will remain on edge as Wall Street closes a volatile week. Opening Bell People are talking less, but no one's quite sure why Between 2005 and 2019, there was a 28% drop in the number of words an average person spoke in a given day. Katty Kay The life-changing potential of next-generation prosthetics A prosthetics expert's life changed after a cycling accident. Now he is testing new technology himself. Tech Now Wall Street surges after US interest rate hike Robert Schein of Blanke Schein Wealth Management says interest rates could go up again later this year. Opening Bell Stunning bird photography in the 'owl capital' of Europe Budapest-based wildlife photographer Manó Aliczki shares his top tips for taking amazing shots of birds. Earth Wall Street attempts recovery as Fed's rate decision looms Gus Scacco of Advisors Capital Management says US markets may react negatively if interest rates hold. Opening Bell Inside the first hospitals of the ancient world In Sicily's Valley of the Temples, spirituality, nature, and herbal treatments shaped early healthcare. Discover the World How fruit flies led to a discovery about our body clock A chronobiologist explains how his Nobel Prize-winning research uncovered the secrets of our biological clock. BBC Select British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages The BBC is in multiple languages Read the BBC In your own language BBC News Brasil BBC News Mundo (Spanish) BBC News မြန်မာ (Burmese) BBC News 中文 (Chinese) BBC News Indonesia BBC News 코리아 (Korean) BBC News ไทย (Thai) BBC News Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese) BBC News Azərbaycanca (Azeri) BBC News Magyarul (Hungarian) BBC News Кыргыз Кызматы (Kyrgyz) BBC News Polska (Polish) BBC News România (Romanian) BBC News Русская служба (Russian) BBC News na srpskom (Serbian) BBC News Україна (Ukrainian) BBC News O'zbek (Uzbek) BBC News عربي (Arabic) BBC News فارسی (Persian) BBC News Türkçe (Turkish) BBC News বাংলা (Bengali) BBC News دری (Dari) BBC News ગુજરાતી (Gujarati) BBC News हिन्दी (Hindi) BBC News मराठी (Marathi) BBC News नेपाली (Nepali) BBC News සිංහල (Sinhala) BBC News ਪੰਜਾਬੀ (Punjabi) BBC News Afaan Oromoo BBC News አማርኛ (Amharic) BBC News Afrique (French) BBC News Hausa BBC News Gaelic NAIDHEACHDAN BBC News Ìgbò BBC News Japanese 日本語 BBC News Gahuza BBC News Pidgin BBC News Somali BBC News Swahili BBC News தமிழ் (Tamil) BBC News తెలుగు (Telugu) BBC News ትግርኛ (Tigrinya) BBC News اردو (Urdu) BBC News Yorùbá BBC News World Service Follow BBC on: Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Do not share or sell my info Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us BBC.com Help & FAQs Content Index Set Preferred Source Copyright 2026 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.