‘We are killed for what we are’: trans women in Colombia targeted by armed groups | Global development | The Guardian Skip to main content Skip to navigation Close dialogue 1 / 7 Next image Previous image Toggle caption Print subscriptions Search jobs Sign in Eur Europe edition UK edition US edition Australia edition International edition The Guardian - Back to home The Guardian News Opinion Sport Culture Lifestyle Show more Hide expanded menu News View all News World news UK news Climate crisis Ukraine Environment Science Global development Football Tech Business Obituaries Opinion View all Opinion The Guardian view Columnists Cartoons Opinion videos Letters Sport View all Sport Football Cricket Rugby union Tennis Cycling F1 Golf US sports Culture View all Culture Books Music TV & radio Art & design Film Games Classical Stage Lifestyle View all Lifestyle Fashion Food Recipes Love & sex Health & fitness Home & garden Women Men Family Travel Money Search input google-search Search Support us Print subscriptions Search jobs Holidays Digital Archive Guardian Licensing Live events About Us The Guardian app Video Podcasts Pictures Newsletters Today's paper Inside the Guardian Guardian Weekly Crosswords Wordiply Corrections Tips Search input google-search Search Search jobs Holidays Digital Archive Guardian Licensing Live events About Us View image in fullscreen Tatiana Cespedes has twice been forced to move and, after death threats, fears being recognised by a member of an armed group Rights and freedom This article is more than 2 years old ‘We are killed for what we are’: trans women in Colombia targeted by armed groups This article is more than 2 years old Tatiana Cespedes has twice been forced to move and, after death threats, fears being recognised by a member of an armed group More than 40 transgender women were killed last year, with armed groups threatening a further wave of ‘social cleansing’ in Caquetá Photographs by Antonio Cascio By Natalia Torres Garzón Supported by About this content Tue 30 Jul 2024 13.00 CEST Last modified on Wed 22 Jan 2025 12.48 CET Share Prefer the Guardian on Google T atiana Cespedes, 51, was working in the hair salon that she had set up in her home in southern Colombia’s department of Caquetá when three armed men burst in. She had one week to leave town, they warned her, otherwise she would be killed. The men belonged to one of the many armed groups that still operate in Colombia despite the peace agreement signed in 2016 between the country’s biggest rebel group, the Farc, and the government. Cespedes, who identifies as a transgender woman, hid at home for a week without knowing what to do, before taking her dog and a small bag and fleeing in the middle of the night to another town. Violence against LGBTQ+ individuals has been on the rise in Colombia: eight trans women were killed between February and April this year, while 41 were killed in 2023. View image in fullscreen Danna Cuellar, who leads the group Libe Trans in Caquetá, was recruited as a child by the Farc. Later, in jail, a Farc leader forced her into a relationship. ‘He wouldn’t allow other men to assault me or abuse me but he would do it himself’ Activists say armed groups are seeking to create a parallel state where those who are seen as damaging society – which for them includes trans women – are punished or killed. Flyers have been appearing on the streets in Caquetá, a stronghold of the armed groups, and circulating through WhatsApp, warning of a plan of “social cleansing” where “faggots, lesbians and men and women who destroy homes” would be among those considered legitimate military targets. Cespedes says she has lived through previous periods of sexual violence by armed groups against trans women, including from the Farc . “All I did was bear their desires because every time they got drunk I had to pay the price. At times three, four, and up to five men would knock on my door and I was forced to open it. If I refused, they would assault me,” she says. View image in fullscreen A flyer warning people in Caquetá about an armed group’s plan for ‘social cleansing’, in which ‘thieves, addicts, coke buyers, lesbians and faggots’ would be targets The 2016 peace agreement between the Farc and the Colombian government recognised LGBTQ+ people as victims of the conflict and guaranteed them the right to political participation. However, an increase in the activity of armed groups in departments such as Caquetá has led to renewed threats against the LGBTQ+ community. Cespedes believes she was targeted because she had been standing as a candidate in the local council elections. After fleeing, Cespedes moved back home with her mother and set up a new working space in her house. She makes some money for food from cutting her neighbours’ hair, but starting all over again has not been easy. “I would ask an organisation that could help me, to give me a salon to work. With this, I could rebuild my life here because I don’t have a life right now.” View image in fullscreen Tatiana sits in the hairdresser’s chair in her mother’s house, where she sees her clients. She hopes to find a way to become economically independent and build a new life Due to discrimination, trans women are usually limited to earning a living as hairdressers or sex workers, says Yesenia Rodríguez. As a trans woman from Caquetá, she says that, with few other opportunities available, she was forced into sex work. “When I started my transition, I used to work at night. At that time we would receive flyers announcing social cleansing of drug addicts, prostitutes and faggots. Luckily nothing happened to me but a friend of mine was killed,” she says. “As a young woman, I didn’t have any other option but to sell my body to survive. But now that time has passed it is difficult for me to work even in this.” skip past newsletter promotion Free newsletter | Every fortnight Sign up to Global Dispatch Get a different world view with a roundup of the best news, features, opinion and photography, curated by our global development team Enter your email Sign up after newsletter promotion View image in fullscreen By night, Yesenia Rodríguez is a sex worker in Florencia, capital of Caquetá department. Trans women say discrimination makes it hard for them to find work, forcing many into prostitution Cespedes says she tries not to leave the house and lives in fear that someone might recognise her. “We, as trans women, are always looked at. But now, when someone looks at me on the street, I think it is because they have identified me or want to harm me,” she says. Catalina González, a 21-year-old woman also known as Jefferson, says she began her transition when she moved to Medellín, Colombia’s second-largest city. Yet, she retook male dressing when she returned home to Caquetá, where she says it is harder to be transgender. View image in fullscreen Danna Cuellar, right, and Catalina González have lived together since González returned from Medellín, where she transitioned. González feels unable to reveal her identity at her family home González, some of whose family members belong to an armed group, avoids visiting relatives for fear of their reaction. “I wonder what they would think. Imagine, if they forced me to join the group to ‘make me a real man’. That’s very scary,” she says. “I’ve always known that I’ll die first, before my mom.” double quotation mark When someone looks at me on the street, I think it is because they want to harm me Tatiana Cespedes Trans activists say the government does little to protect them despite the rise in threats, violence and killings. Aurora Iglesias, an LGBTQ+ activist in Caquetá, says: “The prosecutor’s office doesn’t even recognise a trans-femicide. “They record all the cases as homicides, not even femicides, because the issue of gender is not important to them. “I’m not a prosecutor or a lawyer, but we are killed for what we are, not for being beautiful women passing by. We are being killed because the weight of a visible identity has a price. The truth is that every time we leave our houses, we don’t know if we’ll come back.” View image in fullscreen A trans woman lights a candle in the Colombian capital, Bogotá, to commemorate murdered members of the trans community This article was amended on 31 July 2024 to correct a mistranslation of the word “ vicioso” . Explore more on these topics Rights and freedom Transgender Colombia Farc Americas LGBTQ+ rights Conflict and arms features Share Reuse this content More on this story More on this story Transgender woman wins record payout in China after electroshock treatment 21 Nov 2024 India’s 1st Best Trans Model Agency review – rocky and emotional journey for acceptance 13 Nov 2024 Georgian trans model murdered after parliament passes ‘anti-LGBTQ+’ law 19 Sept 2024 Transgender sprinter Valentina Petrillo fails to reach 400m final on Paralympic debut 2 Sept 2024 The good hacker: can Taiwanese activist turned politician Audrey Tang detoxify the internet? 17 Aug 2024 Valentina Petrillo to become first openly transgender athlete at Paralympics 13 Aug 2024 Transfemicide becomes a crime in a ‘watershed’ moment for Mexico City 24 Jul 2024 ‘The teachers would refer to boys, girls – and you’: trans philosopher Paul B Preciado on reinventing Orlando 3 Jul 2024 Most viewed Most viewed World Europe US news Americas Asia Australia Middle East Africa Inequality Global development News Opinion Sport Culture Lifestyle Original reporting and incisive analysis, direct from the Guardian every morning Sign up for our email About us Help Complaints & corrections Contact us Tip us off SecureDrop Privacy policy Cookie policy Tax strategy Terms & conditions All topics All writers Newsletters Digital newspaper archive Bluesky Facebook Instagram LinkedIn Threads TikTok YouTube Advertise with us Search UK jobs Tips Accessibility settings Work with us Back to top © 2026 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. (dcr)