Why are transgender women jailed in men's prisons around Australia? - ABC News Skip to main content Skip to news navigation, settings and search Explore the ABC More from ABC Close menu ABC ABC News ABC iview ABC listen Kids & Students Indigenous Information & Services Editorial Policies Read our editorial guiding principles Follow the ABC news iview listen Loading ABC News Just In For You Politics World Business Analysis Sport Lifestyle Entertainment Quizzes More Search News Home Just In For You Analysis Rural Watch Live Health Indigenous Politics Science Deep Time Elections World Environment Investigations Business Local news Quizzes Sport AFL NRL Football Tennis Cricket Netball Lifestyle Wellbeing Relationships & Family Food & Recipes Personal Finance Home & Garden Entertainment TV & Movies Books Music Pop Culture Arts Facebook YouTube Instagram Twitter Emergency Backstory Newsletters 中文新闻 BERITA BAHASA INDONESIA TOK PISIN Appearance (BETA) Follow system settings Select an option Always light Always dark Follow system settings ABC iView ABC Listen ABC News News Home Why are transgender women jailed in men's prisons around Australia? Share Share article Why are transgender women jailed in men's prisons around Australia? By Meghna Bali Background Briefing Topic: Prisons Posted Fri 3 Jul 2020 at 5:21am Fri 3 Jul 2020 at 5:21am Fri 3 Jul 2020 at 5:21am Some trans women can be placed into men's prisons, with policy around the country differing from state to state. ( AAP: Jono Searle ) abc.net.au/news/why-are-transgender-women-jailed-in-mens-prisons-in-australia/12416562 Link copied Share Share article Experts estimate there are up to 400 trans and gender-diverse people in prison cells around Australia right now. They are often assessed and housed inappropriately, which can mean they are placed in areas they're not safe in, such as trans women being held in men's prisons. It's a dangerous situation for many and research suggests trans prisoners are more likely to be physically and sexually assaulted and verbally harassed by other inmates or staff. How do we decide which jail trans and gender diverse prisoners are sent to? It's different across the country. In some states, prisoners are supposed to be put in facilities according to their self-identified gender, but in other jurisdictions, authorities decide based on whether someone has been through surgical intervention. NSW, Victoria, the Australian Capital Territory and Tasmania: all have an explicit self-identification policy. This means trans, intersex and gender diverse people are supposed to be placed in a facility that aligns with how they identify. But there are cases where that doesn't happen and sometimes prisoners are held in a prison of their birth sex. This can be based on security or safety reasons or if prison authorities think the person's trans status is not "authentic". Queensland, the Northern Territory and South Australia: the policy is not clear-cut, people can indicate whether they want to go to a male or female prison but placements are considered on a case-by-case basis. Western Australia: does not have a policy dedicated to how transgender prisoners should be managed. Chairperson of the NSW Trans and Gender Diverse Criminal Justice System Advisory Council, Kaz Zinnetti, said these decisions often come down to whether a person has had any medical procedures. If you haven't had bottom surgery, or "gender-confirming surgery" — which comes at a massive cost some can't afford — then you can be placed in a prison based on the gender on your birth certificate. Even if you have breasts and identify as female, you can still go to a men's prison. What's it like for trans women who are sent to male prisons? Mara Ellis was sent to a male prison in 2018. Then 22-years-old, she spent more than four months in Western Australia's notorious Hakea Prison after assaulting her partner and two police officers. Mara Ellis, a trans woman, was sent to Hakea Prison in Perth. ( ABC News: Louise Merrillees ) She'd been on hormone replacement therapy for four years but hadn't legally changed her name or her gender on her birth certificate. Ms Ellis was segregated from the male prisoners in solitary confinement for her own protection. She said this lasted more than three months. She was later shifted to a mainstream part of the prison where she shared a cell with a man. She said she was also sexually assaulted. The UN regards prolonged solitary confinement for more than 15 days as torture. The Executive Director at the United Nations Association of Australia said trans prisoners should not be put in these conditions just because prison authorities don't have the appropriate facilities to house them. " It just shouldn't be that because it's difficult, that therefore the solution is to have a prisoner in solitary confinement. " There hasn't been much research in Australia into trans and gender-diverse prisoners, so it's hard to know how common this kind of experience is. One study of transgender prisoners in US prisons, in 2007 by the University of California , found that transgender inmates were more likely than not to have experienced sexual assault while incarcerated — at a rate more than 13 times higher than their male counterparts. In the limited Australian research available, trans women locked up in male prisons reported being sexually and physically assaulted and verbally harassed by other inmates. Anecdotal evidence suggests incarcerated trans people are often denied hormone therapy, consistently misgendered and humiliated during strip searches. Will there be changes to the way some states deal with gender diverse prisoners? Part of the reason Ms Ellis was forced into a men's prison was that WA doesn't have a specific policy that guides how corrections facilities should manage trans inmates. Western Australia's Corrective Services Commissioner Tony Hassall admits the current system isn't working. "Look, it's not ideal," he said. Podcast Background Briefing Why was this woman sent to a men's prison? Subscribe to the Background Briefing podcast to listen to Australia's best investigative journalism, with a new story every episode. About Subscribe RSS Listen More great ABC podcasts "We have to acknowledge that our existing policies fell short in a number of areas, but what we try to do is maintain the security and safety of any individual in the prison system." Commissioner Hassall agreed that the system needs to be reformed. The WA Corrections department has been working on a policy dedicated to the management of trans, gender diverse and intersex inmates for the past few years. Advocates say the changes were prompted by the case of CJ Palmer, a trans woman who says she spent 200 consecutive days in isolation in a men's prison. Under the reforms, a person who self-identifies as trans, gender diverse or intersex can be considered for placement in a prison that's different to their biological sex. "Each prisoner currently has an individual management plan," Commissioner Hassall said. " With trans prisoners, there will be another layer of support and management plan that goes on top of that to make sure their clinical needs are met and their support in the prisons environment is being managed. " And Commissioner Hassall committed to implementing the policy by the end of the year. "It will be November at the latest," he said. But Ms Zinnetti said policies only work if they're taken seriously. "Policy is a piece of paper. Unless that policy is transferred to practise, it means nothing. "This is where we believe it's very important that training is implemented for correctional staff so that they have an understanding of the unique needs of trans and gender diverse people and how to provide what they need to to protect those individuals from further punishment within the criminal justice system by being physically sexually assaulted, by being denied self-identity." Are there alternatives? Ms Zinnetti admitted there's no silver bullet for keeping trans and gender diverse people safe in prison. She said there are examples of alternative models in the US. One unit in the Los Angeles Men's Central Jail, known as the K6G unit, separates out gay men and trans and gender diverse women from everyone else. "One of the greatest outcomes of that has been the reduced incidence of physical and sexual violence occurring to those inmates," she said. "If that's how we achieve that outcome, then that may be the way forward." But Ms Zinnetti said her preference is for trans women to be housed in women's prisons, "I believe separate facilities to accommodate trans and gender diverse individuals potentially places them at risk of further stigmatisation and discrimination," she said. Share options Copy link Facebook X (formerly Twitter) See more ABC coverage in your search results Make ABC a preferred source in Google Top Stories Rinehart allegedly tried to help recruit Liberal MP to join One Nation Topic: One Nation Men accused of planning terrorist attack at RAF base used to strike Iran Topic: Terrorism Banks cut rewards programs, free travel insurance amid surcharge ban Topic: Banking Migration cuts, AI and rising interest rates mean an era of long-term disinflation A Analysis by Alan Kohler Hundreds of Russian hybrid attacks serve to 'wake everyone up' in NATO Topic: Surveillance Related stories 'Why am I here?' Mara is a woman but was sent to a men's prison Topic: Gender Roles Related topics Australia Human Rights LGBTQIA+ Prisons WA Top Stories Rinehart allegedly tried to help recruit Liberal MP to join One Nation Topic: One Nation Men accused of planning terrorist attack at RAF base used to strike Iran Topic: Terrorism Banks cut rewards programs, free travel insurance amid surcharge ban Topic: Banking Migration cuts, AI and rising interest rates mean an era of long-term disinflation A Analysis by Alan Kohler Hundreds of Russian hybrid attacks serve to 'wake everyone up' in NATO Topic: Surveillance Just In Young Arrernte boxer sets sights on Olympics after AIS opportunity Topic: Boxing Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:07am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:07am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:07am Treasurer to unveil $6 billion improvement to federal budget LIVE Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:02am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:02am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 7:02am Wall Street closes higher, ASX lacks direction ahead of rates decision LIVE Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:59am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:59am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:59am Police launch murder probe after death west of Brisbane Topic: Homicide Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:57am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:57am Mon 28 Sep 2026 at 6:57am More Just In Back to top ABC News Contact ABC News Your home of Australian stories, conversations and events that shape our nation. This service may include material from Agence France-Presse (AFP), APTN, Reuters, AAP, CNN and the BBC World Service which is copyright and cannot be reproduced. Follow ABC News Sections ABC News Home Just In For You Watch Live News Live ABC NewsRadio Politics Elections Australia World Sport Live Sport Rural Business Analysis Science Health Lifestyle Entertainment Quizzes More Topics News in Language Chinese 中文 Tok Pisin Berita Bahasa Indonesia Related ABC News app Local News ABC Emergency ABC Indigenous ABC Religion & Ethics ABC Asia ABC Pacific Music & Audio ABC Listen Home triple j Live Radio Movies & TV ABC iview Home List of ABC Shows Live TV TV Guide Kids & Students BTN Education Heywire Takeover ABC Kids Get the ABC News AM newsletter Get the latest ABC News delivered to your email inbox Email address Subscribe Your information is being handled in accordance with the ABC Privacy Collection Statement . All ABC newsletters Stay informed and connected with the ABC. Covering a wide range of topics and brands including News, iview, listen, and more. Browse all ABC newsletters ABC home Information & Services Editorial Policies Accessibility Help Contact Us Commercial Careers About the ABC Privacy Policy Terms of Use © 2026 ABC Follow the ABC We acknowledge Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples as the First Australians and Traditional Custodians of the lands where we live, learn and work.