Formerly an anti-gay haven, Seychelles becomes a protector of its LGBTQ citizens Now Reading Formerly an anti-gay haven, Seychelles becomes a protector of its LGBTQ citizens Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate Formerly an anti-gay haven, Seychelles becomes a protector of its LGBTQ citizens by Colin Stewart September 27, 2024 Colin Stewart Colin Stewart is a 45-year journalism veteran living in Southern… Read Next First Ugandan who faced death penalty for gay sex is out on bail New penal code in Seychelles threatens extended prison time for hate crimes Seychelles beach In eight years, the tiny African islands of Seychelles have changed from a country that threatened LGBTQ people with prison into a land that protects LGBTQ people from hate-fueled violence. Up until 2016, the law in Seychelles provided for prison sentences of up to 14 years for same-sex intimacy between men. Now a newly revised law calls for increased prison sentences for violent crimes motivated by hostility toward the victims because of their sexual orientation, gender identity, sex characteristics, race, religion or disability. “After South Africa, the Seychelles is now the second country in Africa to protect against all forms of hate-based victimisation,” the Human Dignity Trust (HDT) stated. “The Seychelles National Assembly [last week] passed the groundbreaking Penal Code (Amendment) Bill – the first time in the country’s history that a law has been adopted to protect its citizens from crimes motivated by prejudice and identity-based hate. The Bill, approved by a majority of 18 votes to 8, safeguards Seychellois citizens, especially those from marginalised groups,” HDT reported. See Also Activist speaks out as Senegal’s LGBTQI community is stricken by fear Location of the Seychelles off the east coast of Africa. (Map courtesy of Brittanica.com) Bernard Georges, a member of the Seychelles National Assembly who was a key proponent of the bill, said, “The passing of this bill sends a clear message that the Seychelles is committed to protecting the dignity and safety of all its citizens, regardless of their background or identity. We will not tolerate crimes motivated by hate, and this law is a vital tool in upholding our shared values of equality and justice.” Rebecca Julienne, chair of the human rights advocacy group LGBTI Sey, said, “This Bill offers hope and protection for Seychellois citizens from many communities, including LGBT people. Eight years after decriminalising consensual same-sex sexual intimacy, this is a welcome step for our community in combatting the harms caused by homophobia and other forms of hate, and will serve to encourage victims to report incidents.” Colin Stewart September 27, 2024 The Latest Posts Turkey’s anti-LGBT crackdown expands; activists fight back Proposed Ukraine law would expand ban on anti-LGBTQ discrimination A third of LGBTQ groups say 2025’s drastic cuts will force them to close Bangladesh activists launch petition to end anti-LGBTQ discrimination Uganda’s ‘Not Free’ rating partly due to anti-LGBT laws Appeal to Indonesia to stop listing ‘LGBTQ culture’ as a national threat LGBTI+ rights activists in Turkey seek international support during crackdown Analysis: Cameroon’s anti-gay raids violated Cameroon’s own rules Ghana’s £10m deal is dead; gay fans won’t be lured to homophobic nation Turkey: 162 targeted in anti-LGBTQ+ raids The stage is set for Sri Lanka to repeal its anti-homosexuality law Previous Article First Ugandan who faced death penalty for gay sex is out on bail Next Article View Comment (1) Leave a Reply Cancel reply Your email address will not be published. Name * E-mail * Website Notify me of new posts by email. Δ Related Posts Rightify Ghana trains dozens of queer youth leaders in advocacy Longtime Jamaican activist celebrates long-term marriage ‘We do not support criminalisation’ — Anglican archbishop in Ghana Ugandan trans pastor honored at WorldPride Amsterdam Cameroon: Freed from prison, 3 women go into business — with readers’ help Under attack in Russia, trans support group still racks up successes About The Erasing 76 Crimes news site covers the human toll of 66+ countries’ anti-gay laws and the struggle to repeal them. Member Members of the African Human Rights Media Network publish news articles and other media that educate readers about sexual minorities’ struggle for recognition of their human rights. Partner The St. Paul’s Foundation for International Reconciliation promotes LGBTQ+ rights through fact-based advocacy journalism and community projects. (California charity 80-0647355) © 2026 Erasing 76crimes. All rights reserved. Scroll To Top Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate Facebook Twitter Instagram Discover more from Erasing 76 Crimes Subscribe now to keep reading and get access to the full archive. Type your email… Subscribe Continue reading PRESS ESC TO CLOSE