Anti-LGBTI push at U.N. falls short Now Reading Anti-LGBTI push at U.N. falls short Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate Anti-LGBTI push at U.N. falls short by Colin Stewart November 21, 2016 Colin Stewart Colin Stewart is a 45-year journalism veteran living in Southern… Read Next Caribbean briefs: 2 glimmers of good news Electronic display shows the U.N. General Assembly vote Nov. 21 on an LGBTI rights expert. The voting was on an amendment to defang an anti-LGBTI proposal, so a vote in favor was a vote for keeping the special rapporteur on protection against violence and discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity. The U.N. General Assembly today rejected a plan to undo the U.N. Human Rights Council’s June decision to hire a watchdog to investigate violations of LGBTI rights. Among the countries supporting the LGBTI rapporteur were South Africa, which had earlier indicated support for the anti-LGBTI proposal; Sri Lanka and Kiribati, two countries that still have anti-homosexuality laws; and Belize, which had such a law until it was overturned in court earlier this year. Six countries with anti-homosexuality laws abstained: Barbados, India, Myanmar, Papua New Guinea, Somalia, and Trinidad and Tobago. Several countries said after the 84-77 vote that they would not recognize or cooperate with the new special U.N. rapporteur on sexual orientation and gender identity, Voice of America said. Voice of America reported the day’s news and added this background: Vitit Muntarbhorn (Photo courtesy of the Bangkok Post) African states, led by Botswana, retroactively sought to block the work of Vitit Muntarbhorn, whose mandate came into effect on November 1 as the first U.N. Independent Expert on the Protection against Violence and Discrimination based on Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity (SOGI). The position was created by the Geneva-based U.N. Human Rights Council last June. “No nation or group of nations should pretend to hold a monopoly over cultural norms and therefore seek to impose those values on others,” Botswana’s U.N. ambassador Charles Thembani Ntwaagae [said]. The issue of LGBT rights is a divisive one among the organization’s 193 member states. The U.N. says homosexuality is still a crime in more than 70 nations. Some countries oppose homosexuality based on religious or cultural grounds.Botswana proposed a resolution to delay Muntarbhorn’s appointment until at least next September, so member states could confer further on whether there is basis in international law for establishing the position. The amendment had support from Russia, as well as many Muslim countries. “It’s outrageous of parts of the African group to try to overturn the decision by the Human Rights Council,” British Ambassador Matthew Rycroft told reporters. Several states agreed that the challenge to the council’s authority was inappropriate. South Africa was one of the few African states that did not support delaying Muntarbhorn’s appointment. See Also Global Black Pride will be held in Paris in 2026 “South Africa is still healing the deep wounds caused by racial discrimination. We are not going to add fresh wounds to these wounds we are trying to heal in South Africa,” their envoy said. Latin American states, supported by many Western countries, submitted an amendment to the resolution deleting the request for the postponement. That amendment was adopted, as was the revised resolution, allowing the appointment to go forward. Nearly 800 civil society groups signed an open letter calling on states not to block the SOGI appointment. “The establishment of the Independent Expert does not seek to create new standards, but simply to address within the existing framework provided by established international human rights law a protection gap for individuals facing violence and discrimination on the basis of their sexual orientation and gender identity,” the letter reads in part. Related articles: Opposition and delay confront anti-LGBT push at U.N. (Nov. 10, 2016, 76crimes.com) A Plea to the African Group at the 71st Session of the UN General Assembly (Nov. 8, 2016, Anthony-Oluoch.com) Anti-LGBT nations seek to end U.N. advocacy of LGBT rights (Nov. 7, 2016, 76crimes.com) African States sell out LGBT Human Rights in bid to end role of UN Expert (Nov. 7, 2016, O-blog-dee blog) U.N. approves LGBTI rights watchdog (June-July 2016, 76crimes.com) Iran pushes ‘Islamic human rights’ excluding LGBT people (June-July 2016, 76crimes.com) Iran rejects U.N. plea to stop abuse of LGBTI youths ( February 2016, 76crimes.com) Colin Stewart November 21, 2016 The Latest Posts Turkey’s anti-LGBT crackdown expands; activists fight back Proposed Ukraine law would expand ban on anti-LGBTQ discrimination A third of LGBTQ groups say 2025’s drastic cuts will force them to close Bangladesh activists launch petition to end anti-LGBTQ discrimination Uganda’s ‘Not Free’ rating partly due to anti-LGBT laws Appeal to Indonesia to stop listing ‘LGBTQ culture’ as a national threat LGBTI+ rights activists in Turkey seek international support during crackdown Analysis: Cameroon’s anti-gay raids violated Cameroon’s own rules Ghana’s £10m deal is dead; gay fans won’t be lured to homophobic nation Turkey: 162 targeted in anti-LGBTQ+ raids Nigerian LGBT website fights blackmail Previous Article Caribbean briefs: 2 glimmers of good news Next Article View Comments (4) Leave a Reply Cancel reply Your email address will not be published. Name * E-mail * Website Notify me of new posts by email. Δ Related Posts Haiti’s wary LGBT+ activists brace for first elections in 10 years Rightify Ghana trains dozens of queer youth leaders in advocacy Longtime Jamaican activist celebrates long-term marriage Will Uganda’s candidate for top UN post speak out against homophobia? Petition calls on South Africa to reject anti-LGBTQ conference ‘We do not support criminalisation’ — Anglican archbishop in Ghana About The Erasing 76 Crimes news site covers the human toll of 66+ countries’ anti-gay laws and the struggle to repeal them. Member Members of the African Human Rights Media Network publish news articles and other media that educate readers about sexual minorities’ struggle for recognition of their human rights. Partner The St. Paul’s Foundation for International Reconciliation promotes LGBTQ+ rights through fact-based advocacy journalism and community projects. (California charity 80-0647355) © 2026 Erasing 76crimes. All rights reserved. Scroll To Top Home About If you need help News by country News by topic Donate Facebook Twitter Instagram Discover more from Erasing 76 Crimes Subscribe now to keep reading and get access to the full archive. Type your email… Subscribe Continue reading PRESS ESC TO CLOSE