Skip to main content Skip to header right navigation Skip to after header navigation Skip to site footer MyZA News, Directory, Events and Other Stuff Menu Social Media
Sport
World News
Home
Submit News
Directory
Events
Stratlec
TFSA
News
APO
Today’s Sport News
Todays Social Media and Tech Headlines
Today’s World News
Today’s SA Financial News
Contact
You are here: Home / News / Khoi and San Deserve Justice at Once Khoi and San Deserve Justice at Once
17 October 2025 by Guest The legal principle of justice delayed is justice denied is more relevant to the Khoi and San traditional leaders and their communities than ever, as they are still suffering injustice. For three decades, the ANC government has failed to officially recognise these indigenous groups, while Nguni communities such as the Xhosa and Zulu enjoy benefits […]
The post Khoi and San deserve justice at once appeared first on Freedom Front Plus.
The legal principle of justice delayed is justice denied is more relevant to the Khoi and San traditional leaders and their communities than ever, as they are still suffering injustice.
For three decades, the ANC government has failed to officially recognise these indigenous groups, while Nguni communities such as the Xhosa and Zulu enjoy benefits under existing legislation.
The Constitutional Court’s ruling on 14 October 2025 suspended the declaration of invalidity of the Traditional and Khoi-San Leadership Act (TKLA) for two years until 29 May 2027 – signifying regress rather than redress.
During this time, national, provincial and local governments are free to adopt legislation without guaranteeing the rights of Khoi and San communities.
In the Western Cape, where these communities are strongly represented, their unrecognised status perpetuates exclusion from spatial planning and municipal boundary demarcation.
The DA-led provincial government has, since the Traditional Leadership and Governance Framework Act took effect in 2003, failed to establish a Provincial House of Traditional Leaders. This failure deepens the marginalisation of the Khoi and San.
Meanwhile, the persistent lack of institutional capacity in the Department of Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs (COGTA) hinders any progress.
Funds annually earmarked for Khoi-San research are returned unspent, while there is still no concrete recognition.
The inequality is shocking and unacceptable: Nguni leaders enjoy full legal status, while Khoi-San leaders remain oppressed. This is a gross violation of the Constitution’s principle of equality.
The Government of National Unity (GNU) has a historic opportunity to correct this injustice, but it all depends on whether the President has the political will to prioritise the rights of Khoi-San communities instead of ignoring them.
The Freedom Front Plus (VF Plus) is the only party taking a firm stand for the Khoi and San’s right to recognition and self-determination.
The party calls on these communities to intensify their activism and stand up for their cause with the Freedom Front Plus.
The Constitutional Court’s ruling, albeit in good faith, perpetuates exclusion as long as the ANC and its allies fail to take appropriate action.
Freedom Front Plus Land Reform: The FF Plus opposes land expropriation without compensation.
Read More at the Source
Share this:
Share on X (Opens in new window)
X
Share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Facebook
Print (Opens in new window)
Print
Email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
Email
Share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
LinkedIn
Share on Tumblr (Opens in new window)
Tumblr
Share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window)
WhatsApp
Share on Mastodon (Opens in new window)
Mastodon
Category: News Tag: ACT , Freedom Front Plus , GNU , GOOD , Government , Khomani , Komani , Politics , Western Cape
If you feel strongly about this article then feel free to send MyZA a ‘Letter to the Editor’ using the submission form below:
Letter to the Editor
Phone This field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged. Title (Required)
If this is in response to an article please include that article title here or as the lead in for the first paragraph of your Letter below. Letter (Required) Keywords (Required)
Separate tags with commas
Localise your letter by naming the city your words are about. Add relevant words describing your subject. Single comma separated words of no more than 5 Your Name (Required)
First
Last
Your Name will be linked to the website below. Email (Required)
Website
Your personal, business or social media web site User Registration? (Required) Yes No Choose NO to not set up a user account on MyZA. User Accounts will allow you to submit letters under your own Author Name
Submit
3 Latest Letters to the Editor:
Congratulations to the Lucky Winner
Dear Editor Congratulations to the lucky R8.5 million Lotto winner! This is indeed exciting news for the community of Nomathamsanqa. Wishing the winner all the best with this life-changing prize. Regards Samuel Nkosi In Response to/From: R8.5 Million Lotto Winner Claims Prize in Gqeberha
25 September 2026
Pensioners’ Rights Matter
Dear Editor This is a very important issue affecting vulnerable pensioners. It’s crucial that proper verification processes are in place before any deductions are made from SASSA grants. I appreciate the investigation that brought this to light. Regards Samuel Nkosi In Response to/From: Pensioners Refunded After We Queried Funeral Policy Deductions
25 September 2026
Lotto Winner Article
Dear Editor Congratulations to the lucky winner! This is indeed exciting news for the community. Wishing the winner all the best. Regards Buhle Ngcobo In Response to/From: R8.5 Million Lotto Winner Claims Prize in Gqeberha
23 September 2026
About Guest
Previous Post: Emfuleni Is Failing Major Industries and Businesses
Next Post: Fort Hare Paid R17-Million for Work That Was Never Done
Reader Interactions Comments
Guillotine Trigger
18 September 2026 at 12:54 am
I told my dad to embrace his mistakes. He cried, then he hugged me and my sister
oblivion
16 September 2026 at 8:37 pm
What do you call the oke at a South African gathering who cooks the food?
Braai\’n
Copyright © 2026 · MyZA · All Rights Reserved · Powered by Stratlec Online