Myanmar | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Myanmar At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? No Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? No Legal Gender Recognition Possible? No LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? No Last Update: March 12, 2026 Myanmar’s legal and political environment remains extremely hostile to queer and trans people. Same-sex intimacy is criminalized under Section 377 of the penal code , a colonial-era provision that continues to enable arrest, harassment, and stigma. In practice, enforcement is reinforced by “shadow laws” and broad police discretion , including provisions such as Section 30(d) of the 1899 Rangoon Police Act, which has historically been used to detain people who cannot “satisfactorily account” for their presence “within the precincts of any dwelling.” Since the February 1, 2021 military coup, risks have intensified sharply. LGBTQ people face heightened vulnerability under junta rule, including abuses in interrogation and detention that reflect homophobia, transphobia, misogyny, and the normalization of punitive sexual violence in conflict settings. The UN Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Myanmar has also warned that women, girls, and LGBTQ people face widespread sexual and gender-based violence and severe barriers to both support and accountability in the post-coup context. In October 2022, the junta passed the Organization Registration Law , which imposes sweeping controls over civil society, forcing NGOs to register and report funding sources while granting authorities broad oversight powers. Noncompliance can carry prison terms and fines , and LGBTQ and human rights organizations view compliance as likely leading to the shutdown of activities construed as “anti-State.” The enforcement of compulsory military service, announced in February 2024, has contributed to displacement and insecurity for many LGBTQ people, some of whom have fled border areas and neighboring countries. In 2025, Myanmar’s junta banned seven books with LGBTQ themes, reinforcing censorship of queer voices. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International