Skip to main content
Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials
Donate
Country Overview Chile
At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? Yes
Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? Yes
Legal Gender Recognition Possible? Yes
LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? Yes
Last Update:
March 12, 2026
Chile has made significant progress on LGBTIQ equality. Same-sex marriage and adoption have been legal since March 2022. Since 2012, Chile’s hate crime law has included sexual orientation and gender identity as aggravating circumstances, and since 2015, same-sex civil unions have been legally recognized. In 2019, a comprehensive  legal gender recognition law based on self-determination was passed, and a third sex option has been available for intersex children on birth certificates since 2006. While there is no legal ban on medically unnecessary surgeries (IGM) on minors, in 2023, the Minister of Health published non-binding intersex-affirming  guidance , including recommendations against IGM.
There have also been  positive judicial developments in recent years , including a landmark decision of a family court in 2020 recognizing two women as the parents of a child born through assisted reproduction. In 2025, a criminal court issued the country’s first conviction for lesbophobic femicide , applying Article 390 ter of the penal code, which recognizes killings motivated by sexual orientation, gender identity, or expression as aggravated femicides.
Societal opinion of sexual and gender minorities is primarily positive. However, there has been recent pushback on transgender people’s rights, echoing  trends seen in numerous countries in 2025 . Following the Cass Report in the United Kingdom, Chile established a parliamentary investigative commission in 2024 to analyze public policies regarding transgender children and adolescents. The final  report of this commission, approved by Congress in May 2025, portrays gender-affirming initiatives as a threat to children’s development and the exercise of parental authority. It further recommends banning hormonal treatments for minors, auditing hospitals and educational programs that apply gender-affirmative approaches, and pursuing disciplinary or even criminal action against professionals involved in what it describes as “prohibited interventions.” While this report is not binding, its congressional approval gave significant political weight to its stigmatizing narratives about trans youth.
In the latest measure to roll back on trans people’s rights, the Chilean congress  excluded the Gender Identity Support Program (PAIG) from the 2026 budget bill, an action condemned by various civil society groups and the  national ombuds for children. Civil society organizations have also expressed  concern over the 2025 presidential election victory of José Antonio Kast, who is a  longstanding member of the Political Network for Values, a group that opposes  marriage equality and  trans people’s rights .
View more for this country: Read the Research
Browse Insights
Global Impact
Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people.
View this region
United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region
Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region
Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security.
View this region
Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine.
View this region
Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people.
View this region
Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice.
View this region
Global View this region
Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports
Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality.
Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy
Connect With Us
228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28
New York, NY 10017 USA
+1 212-430-6054
For general inquiries:
[email protected]
For media inquiries:
[email protected]
© 2026 Outright International