Transgender blind spot in hospitalization: NHRCK - The Korea Herald Print edition National Politics Seoul Education Social Affairs Courts and Law Foreign Affairs Military North Korea Diplomatic Circuit Health National Transgender blind spot in hospitalization: NHRCK My Page For our subscribers National All Politics Seoul Education Social Affairs Courts and Law Foreign Affairs Military North Korea Diplomatic Circuit Health Business All Industry Technology Mobility Consumer Economy Market Life&Culture All Culture Travel Food Books People Film Television Performance Sports All Soccer Baseball Golf More Sports World All World News World Business Opinion All Editorial Viewpoints K-pop Recipe Newsletter 한국어판 Living In Seoul Map English Cafe More + #Hashtag Korea Weekender Podcast PR newswire Print edition KH Media Kit RSS Transgender blind spot in hospitalization: NHRCK Published : Nov. 28, 2023 - 18:09:35 Updated : Dec. 19, 2024 - 09:05:19 Add The Korea Herald on Google Link copied! Choi Jeong-yoon Subscribe + Developing guidelines to accomodate diverse circumstances for trans inpatients is difficult, Health Ministry says (123rf) The Ministry of Health and Welfare rejected a request to devise guidelines of hospitalization for transgender people, said the state human rights watchdog. The National Human Rights Commission of Korea (NHRCK) announced on Tuesday that the Health Ministry failed to give clear answers on how the country will accommodate trans patients. Under current medical law, patient rooms are operated separately for men and women. The human rights group pointed out that this puts trans and nonbinary people in a blind spot for medical services. Previously, the Health Ministry has sent an official letter to an association of Korean hospitals to recommend trans patients stay in single-person hospital rooms. However, such a recommendation lacked consideration, as it imposed a financial burden on them to pay more than other patients, according to the commission. In response, the ministry said, “There are limitations to establishing guidelines in advance that anticipate the circumstances of all transgender people.” It also stated that “making uniform recommendations for hospitalizations of transgender inpatients for all health care organizations across the country requires careful consideration based on social consensus.” The NHRCK had requested the ministry to come up with a guideline earlier in January after receiving a petition from a trans woman who was denied admission to a female ward in 2021. At the time, the trans woman had received hormone therapy, but was listed as male on her resident registration, as she had not undergone sex change surgery nor corrected her legal gender. The hospital reportedly said that there were two other trans patients who were hospitalized in the same year, and both of them used a single room at their own expense. Health Ministry officials had also added that it "comprehensively considers various factors such as whether the court has approved of gender correction, the state of sex reassignment surgery and the social expectation of a transgender to perform the role of their identity.” However, some trans people say they find such decisions unjust. Chae, 31, who uses female pronouns, says that the health authorities' recent decision is "understandable but unfair." "It's hard to have everybody embrace who we are. I wouldn't want to make other female patients feel threatened or uncomfortable. Just like that, I want to be treated in a place where I feel safe," said Chae. She said that the most ideal way to include everyone would be having an “X ward,” a separate room for transgender individuals. While it is inevitable that health care organizations classify inpatients according to specific criteria, such as their legal sex at the time of admission, the reality is that there are people who cannot be categorized simply by their legal sex, or whose biological sex assigned at birth does not match their perceived and expressed gender identity, said the human rights agency. The NHRCK condemned the health authority’s sluggish action, calling “the lack of understanding of the discrimination that trans individuals face” the reason behind its lack of efforts to improve the quality of health care for them. jychoi@heraldcorp.com Choi Jeong-yoon Subscribe + Making employment work for people with disabilities How a Korean immigrant’s English struggle helped deaf users make phone calls [팟캐스트] (809)앞으로 한국의 여름은 어떨까? good 0 sad 0 angry 0 recommended 0 More from Headlines Why SK hynix is weighing US memory production “I think we need to build a factory in the United States. If possible, I believe we should build it,” SK Group Chairman Chey Tae-won said in July. Seoul education chief pushes to make international learning part of everyday classrooms x Prosecutors’ Office closes this week, successor agencies still await chiefs x 4 suspects flee to China after vandalizing restaurant x Editor’s picks KH Explains Why SK hynix is weighing US memory production Beyond WHO approval, EuBiologics targets global typhoid vaccine market Herald Interview TikToker Chambo’s new quest: Building a better home for foreign creators Herald Interview Recommended Series more 100 Food Challenge 100 foods to try: Are you up to the challenge? Food Challenge Survive & Thrive A guide to living in South Korea for those new to the country Expat Seoul life Stars Up Close A spotlight on Korean artists who rose to prominence in unexpected ways, and moments behind their breakthroughs Artist Behind True Crime Take a stroll through the darker side of Korea’s past Korean crime True crime Most Read National All 1 Korean student among 7 sued over group sexual assault at Cornell University 2 Is skinny worth it? Korea's weight-loss obsession and the health risks it brings 3 2 N. Korean POWs arrived in S. Korea 'several days ago': lawmaker 4 Foreign-national children should qualify for childcare support: report 5 1st mass-produced KF-21 delivered to Air Force, marking milestone for homegrown fighter program 1 Korean student among 7 sued over group sexual assault at Cornell University 2 4 suspects flee to China after vandalizing restaurant 3 Pantsless flasher roams near girls' school for months, police can't catch him 4 Why SK hynix is weighing US memory production 5 Korea beats Japan for fifth straight Asian Games baseball gold Announcement Contact Us Family Site THE HERALD BUSINESS HERALD MUSE REAL FOODS HERALD ECO HERALD DESIGN THE INVESTOR About Korea Herald About Herald Corporation Code of Ethics User Agreement Privacy Statement Copyright Policy Herald Ombudsman Sitemap Address : Huam-ro 4-gil 10, Yongsan-gu,Seoul, Korea Tel : +82-2-727-0114 Online newspaper registration No : Seoul 아03711 Date of registration : 2015.04.28 Publisher. Editor : Choi Jin-Young Juvenile Protection Manager : Choi He-suk The Korea Herald by Herald Corporation. Copyright Herald Corporation. All Rights Reserved.