Denmark's decade of self-ID cools debate on trans rights | Context by TRF Skip to Content Newsletters Context is no longer producing new reporting, but this site will remain as an archive. Further details on the Thomson Reuters Foundation's journalism can be found here. Climate Inclusive Economies Tech & Society LGBTQ+ stories on Context Inclusive Economies Socioeconomic Inclusion Denmark's decade of self-ID cools debate on trans rights Lucy Middleton Published: September 25, 2024 Share Participants walk in the rain at the Aalborg Pride Parade in Aalborg, Denmark, July 13, 2024. Ritzau Scanpix/Henning Bagger via REUTERS What’s the context? Denmark has avoided bitter polarisation over trans rights after becoming first European country to pass self-identification law Denmark was first European country to introduce self-ID No criminal incidents recorded since law passed Self-ID remains subject of debate around world COPENHAGEN – When a Danish court ruled that a transgender inmate should not be transferred to a women’s prison unit because of her violent past, the case failed to ignite the kind of political storm gender identity issues have sparked elsewhere. Activists credit the country’s long-standing self-identification law , which allows people to change their gender without a medical evaluation, for helping to lower the temperature in conversations about transgender issues. Ranked as one of the best places in the world for LGBTQ+ rights, Denmark was the first country in the world to recognise same-sex partnerships in 1989. This month, it marks 10 years since becoming the first European country to introduce a law permitting self-determination, also called self-ID. Such legislation has become a hotly contested issue in places like the United States and Britain. A self-identification bill in Scotland was blocked by the British government in 2023. In Denmark, a legal case by a trans prisoner, referred to as “A” in court, who argued that serving time on a men’s ward and being subject to strip searches in the presence of male staff was a violation of her human rights thrust self-determination into the spotlight for the first time, activists said. Yet after a decade of little controversy around the law, the case has not led to a wider campaign against trans rights, they said. In September, the Supreme Court upheld a lower court judgment from 2023 that denied the prisoner’s petition and cited the nature of her offences that included “serious violence and rape” against women before she changed her legal gender. Go Deeper What are trans self-ID laws and what impact do they have? Go Deeper Europe 'polarised' on LGBTQ+ rights as attacks at all-time high Go Deeper Spain's first trans senator vows to defend gender self-ID law LGBT+ Denmark, the country's oldest association for the community, said it largely agreed with the Supreme Court’s ruling not to move the prisoner, due to her criminal background and sentence length, but it has concerns about the decision permitting strip searches. The group have called for the inmate’s gender identity to be respected, no matter where she is placed. “We want trans women to be treated as women everywhere, including in prisons, and we know that there are trans women in female units in Denmark," Susanne Branner, director of LGBT+ Denmark, told Context outside the organisation's offices in Copenhagen. "This is a special case, and we want it to be treated as such. It would not have been reasonable to transfer her." ILGA-Europe, an international advocacy group, had called the lower court's ruling "regressive" in a report earlier this year, but declined to comment on the binding judgment. Wedge issue High-profile cases in other parts of the world have been used to subvert the rights of trans people, said Richard Köhler, senior policy officer at Transgender Europe, a network of rights groups. "The distinction to the UK is that there, these kinds of situations are artificially brought to the attention of people and constructed as a conflict (over self-determination),” he said by phone from Berlin. "Using this case to undermine the right to self-determination for most trans people is an absolutely absurd escalation and the simplification of a completely different topic." Trans rights have been a contentious political issue in general elections in Britain and the United States this year, even though the community is estimated at less than 1% of the population worldwide. Self-determination laws have been adopted in 12 European countries, including Belgium, Malta, Spain, Germany and Norway. LGBTQ+ groups say the laws allow trans people to get on with their lives quicker as the gender they identify as, but opponents say they could be used by predatory men to gain access to single-sex spaces and put women and girls at risk. In Demark, more than 2,600 people have changed their gender since 2014, with each individual undergoing a six-month reflection as part of the transition process. In August 2022, authorities in Denmark told Transgender Europe there had been no cases of individuals using the self-determination process with fraudulent or criminal intentions since its introduction. "I wouldn't say that self-ID has been any threat to women's rights movement in Denmark - actually I would more say the opposite," said Helene Forsberg, director of the Women's Council Denmark, an umbrella NGO for more than 40 rights organisations, who noted it was not one of the group’s focus points. "Many parts of society unfortunately try to make some kind of opposition between (trans rights and women's rights), which I don't believe there is." Debate moves on In Denmark, more than half of LGBTQ+ people said they believe their government effectively combats prejudice and intolerance towards the community, according to a European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights survey published this year. This was above the EU average of 26% . In August, Danish Equality Minister Marie Bjerre faced criticism from LGBTQ+ groups after she described self-determination laws as " problematic " in a column for the newspaper Jyllands-Posten. Bjerre was later removed from her post in a cabinet reshuffle. The Danish government did not immediately reply to a request for comment. With self-determination well-established, the political debate has mostly moved on in Denmark. Parliament has considered removing the age limit on legal gender changes and banning conversion therapy . Trans activists in Denmark want the public discourse to concentrate on challenges the community still faces, such as healthcare and employment. One pressing concern is access to gender reassignment surgery, as trans people can wait up to 10 years for this through public healthcare, unless they choose to use private treatment at their own expense. "The discussion should be about our engagement in society. We have huge unemployment, we (need more) participation in the different public clubs in Denmark, like amateur sports, so we can be a part of society," said Ninna Helsinghoff, a board member at Danske Bank Rainbow and LGBT+ Denmark, who changed her gender as soon as the self-determination law came into effect. "Right now we are kind of stuck behind in this discussion about which changing room we can use, and it is really not what matters to us." (Reporting by Lucy Middleton; editing by Ayla Jean Yackley.) Context is powered by the Thomson Reuters Foundation Newsroom. Our Standards: Thomson Reuters Trust Principles Part of: Pride in backlash? LGBTQ+ rights at a crossroads From Trump's USAID cuts to Hungary's Pride ban, LGBTQ+ rights are under attack. This Pride month we explore this global backlash Updated: June 06, 2025 Tags LGBTQ+ MORE ON Socioeconomic Inclusion Socioeconomic Inclusion Meet Spain's first ambassador for global LGBTQ+ rights Opinion Socioeconomic Inclusion It’s time for a currency that values the planet, not just profit Socioeconomic Inclusion 'I lost my job': US aid cuts hit women clearing Zimbabwe's mines MORE ON Inclusive Economies Money, Power & People One year of Trump: How the president undermined global LGBTQ+ rights Money, Power & People US abortion policy under Trump 2.0 one year on Socioeconomic Inclusion International aid cuts hobble drive to declare Zimbabwe mine-free Featured President Donald Trump 2.0: What's next for the U.S.? Our experienced correspondents around the United States and further afield examine how a Trump presidency affects climate change, reproductive rights, LGBTQ+ communities, immigration, socio-economic inclusion, and debates around Big Tech and AI. Here’s a round-up of our coverage so far. Go Deeper Socioeconomic Inclusion What are trans self-ID laws and what impact do they have? Socioeconomic Inclusion Europe 'polarised' on LGBTQ+ rights as attacks at all-time high Socioeconomic Inclusion Spain's first trans senator vows to defend gender self-ID law Socioeconomic Inclusion What are trans self-ID laws and what impact do they have? Socioeconomic Inclusion Europe 'polarised' on LGBTQ+ rights as attacks at all-time high Socioeconomic Inclusion Spain's first trans senator vows to defend gender self-ID law The Backstory New Zealand Olympians call for review of transgender guidelines UK Conservatives say they will define sex as biological to end 'confusion' Germany, France join EU proceedings against Hungary over anti-LGBT law New Zealand Olympians call for review of transgender guidelines UK Conservatives say they will define sex as biological to end 'confusion' Germany, France join EU proceedings against Hungary over anti-LGBT law These links open on reuters.com Related Socioeconomic Inclusion We made this podcast in 2023. Why did we wait to release it? Socioeconomic Inclusion No place for queer people 8:14 Socioeconomic Inclusion No meds, no doctor: How Trump's HIV cuts hit trans Namibians Socioeconomic Inclusion We made this podcast in 2023. Why did we wait to release it? Socioeconomic Inclusion No place for queer people 8:14 Socioeconomic Inclusion No meds, no doctor: How Trump's HIV cuts hit trans Namibians Get ‘Policy, honestly’ to learn how big decisions impact ordinary people. Email address: Subscribe By providing your email, you agree to our Privacy Policy . MORE ON Socioeconomic Inclusion Socioeconomic Inclusion Meet Spain's first ambassador for global LGBTQ+ rights Opinion Socioeconomic Inclusion It’s time for a currency that values the planet, not just profit Socioeconomic Inclusion 'I lost my job': US aid cuts hit women clearing Zimbabwe's mines MORE ON Inclusive Economies Money, Power & People One year of Trump: How the president undermined global LGBTQ+ rights Money, Power & People US abortion policy under Trump 2.0 one year on Socioeconomic Inclusion International aid cuts hobble drive to declare Zimbabwe mine-free Latest on Context 13:02 AI AI needs a lot of power and water. Can Mexico afford it? Long Read AI Resistance blooms in Mexico's data centre valley Socioeconomic Inclusion ‘I felt dirty': Gay Panamanians fight blood donation ban Climate Risks What one year of Trump’s climate censorship reveals Most Read 1 How flood control projects fail the poor in the Philippines 2 Britain's foreign aid: Where does the money go? 3 Resistance blooms in Mexico's data centre valley 4 What does a Donald Trump presidency mean for LGBTQ+ rights? 5 Europe's security depends on LGBTI+ rights - here's why 6 ‘I felt dirty': Gay Panamanians fight blood donation ban Most Read 1 How flood control projects fail the poor in the Philippines 2 Britain's foreign aid: Where does the money go? 3 Resistance blooms in Mexico's data centre valley 4 What does a Donald Trump presidency mean for LGBTQ+ rights? 5 Europe's security depends on LGBTI+ rights - here's why Context is a media platform created by the Thomson Reuters Foundation. We provide news and analysis that contextualises how critical issues and events affect ordinary people, society and the environment. Find out more. Sections Climate Inclusive Economies Tech & Society Explore Opinion Videos In Focus Long Reads About Us About Context About Thomson Reuters Foundation Come Work For Us Sponsors Donations Newsletters Our Products Workforce Disclosure Initiative The Workforce Disclosure Initiative is an investor-backed project to improve the quantity & quality of corporate workforce data, via an annual survey & engagement process. Find out more. Trust Conference Trust Conference is the Thomson Reuters Foundation’s flagship annual event, taking place in the heart of London each year. Find out more. TrustLaw TrustLaw is the Thomson Reuters Foundation’s global pro bono service, facilitating free legal assistance to NGOs and social enterprises around the world. Find out more. Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Thomson Reuters Trust Principles © 2026 Thomson Reuters Foundation Exclusive commentary & unique insights. Always free. Directly to your inbox. Subscribe Now