Positioning Thailand as an LGBTQ+ Tourism Hub: Opportunities and Challenges | FULCRUM Skip to content Home Articles ASEANFocus Contributors About Us Submission Guidelines Search for: HOME ARTICLES Positioning Thailand as an LGBTQ+ Tourism Hub: Opportunities and Challenges Participants hold a giant rainbow flag during Bangkok Pride Parade on 4 June 2025. (Photo by Valeria Mongelli / Hans Lucas / Hans Lucas via AFP) A+ A- Positioning Thailand as an LGBTQ+ Tourism Hub: Opportunities and Challenges Published 18 Jun 2025 Erika Chandra Thailand has begun to market its LGBTQ+ friendliness to woo LGBTQ+ tourists and boost the economy. While the country has made progressive strides by legalising same-sex marriage, transgender individuals still face systemic hurdles. Thailand’s efforts to boost queer tourism following the legalisation of same-sex marriage goes further than a mere nod to progressiveness. They are an opportunistic embrace of inclusivity aimed at spurring economic growth and positioning the country as a global LGBTQ+ destination. At the same time, these efforts raise a fundamental question: do they reflect a genuine commitment to uplifting the local queer community or are they largely mercenary in nature? Thailand has long been portrayed in international travel media as a “ queer paradise ” and one of the most welcoming countries in Asia towards LGBTQ+ travellers. This reputation can largely be attributed to the nation’s relatively accepting nature towards the LGBTQ+ community and its rich and well-established queer scene open to LGBTQ+ tourists from around the world. Against this backdrop, the Thai government’s promotion of queer tourism alongside the legalisation of same-sex marriage is a strategic leveraging of pre-existing advantages and trends to capture a bigger slice of the growing global LGBTQ+ tourism industry and enhance Thailand’s economy and global image. In 2019, prior to the pandemic, Thailand’s LGBTQ+ tourism revenue was reported to have totalled 212 billion Thai baht (US$6.5 billion) , placing Thailand ahead of the rest of the world in terms of the share it contributed to GDP, that is, 1.23 per cent. This revenue fell to 52.5 billion baht in 2022 amid the pandemic, yet it accounted for approximately 3.5 per cent of Thailand’s total tourism revenue that year, indicating the industry’s potential as a significant driver of Thailand’s tourism growth. One of the Tourism Authority of Thailand’s (TAT) efforts at capitalising on this prospective industry was the launch of the “Go Thai, Be Free” campaign in 2013, specifically targeting LGBTQ+ travellers. This initiative has since been expanded into a dedicated website , a marketing strategy encouraging LGBTQ+ visitors to explore Thailand’s attractions. A notable recent promotional initiative was the “ Amazing Thailand Out There ” event that facilitated worldwide partnerships and celebrated Thailand’s vibrant queer scene. With the Marriage Equality Law coming into effect in January 2025, queer tourism in Thailand is poised to become an increasingly lucrative sector. Mahidol University’s College of Management (CMMU) projected that Thailand would benefit economically from this law, generating a tourism revenue of 152 billion baht and raising Thailand’s GDP by 0.3 per cent, amid a total tourism revenue forecast of approximately 3 trillion baht in 2025. Beyond increased revenue, the economic benefits are expected to extend to the creation of full-time equivalent jobs within the tourism industry, with the remainder spread across the broader Thai economy, particularly the wedding sector. Wedding businesses are reported to have jumped on the opportunity by better equipping themselves to host LGBTQ+ weddings. Such growth will diversify and strengthen Thailand’s tourism sector, further solidifying the country’s position as a premier destination for LGBTQ+ weddings and related services. Admittedly, heavy reliance on tourism, including the wedding industry, is not exclusive to Thailand in Southeast Asia. Bali and Cebu, for example, are also popular hubs for tourism and wedding destinations, with Cebu recently crowned by World Travel Awards as Asia’s top wedding destination . Yet neither Indonesia nor the Philippines currently recognises same-sex marriage, which potentially limits their appeal to LGBTQ+ travellers seeking inclusive wedding experiences. The combination of legalised same-sex marriage and Thailand’s strategic promotion of queer tourism grants the country a clear first-mover advantage in Southeast Asia. Concerns have been raised about “rainbow washing”, where commodification of the LGBTQ+ community for economic benefits is prioritised over genuine systemic inclusion. Furthermore, Thailand’s trajectory stands in contrast to the backsliding of LGBTQ+ inclusivity in the West. Parts of Europe have seen a rise in right-wing politics, inevitably resulting in the undermining of LGBTQ+ rights . Similarly, President Trump rolled back the Biden administration’s inclusion and diversity policies, which include trans healthcare funding . Thailand, in contrast, has both intentionally and unintentionally constructed a holistic queer ecosystem that goes beyond marketing efforts to draw LGBTQ+ tourists. For instance, in addition to the marriage equality law, it has developed some pro-LGBTQ+ domestic policies, such as the allocation of 145.63 million baht to provide health services for Thailand’s transgender community. This blend of domestic reforms and global marketing initiatives appears to reflect a deeper integration of inclusivity into its LGBTQ+ tourism strategy. However, concerns have been raised about “ rainbow washing ”, where commodification of the LGBTQ+ community for economic benefits is prioritised over genuine systemic inclusion. As early as 2015, the Thai government took some steps to protect the LGBTQ+ community against gender-based discrimination by enacting the Gender Equality Act . However, gaps remain. Transgender and non-binary individuals are still unable to obtain legal documents that reflect their self-identified gender rather than the one assigned at birth. Such gaps can lead to difficulties in clearing immigration and in accessing public amenities in accordance with their self-identified gender. Enforcement of the existing legal protections is also reported to be weak . Moreover, societal attitudes are not entirely positive: Thailand’s trans community, in particular, remains highly vulnerable to violence and discrimination . In June 2024, a UN body and two other organisations released a toolkit in the hope of promoting gender-inclusive workplaces. According to a study conducted to prepare the toolkit, 45 per cent of LGBTQ+ interviewees reported facing job rejections because of their gender identity, while 46 per cent had to conceal their gender identity at the workplace. The Thai government would need to engage in sustained consultations with the LGBTQ+ community and organisations championing their rights to bring about meaningful and consistent improvements of the local queer community’s well-being. Otherwise, the lived experiences of some in the community risk being masked by the dazzling queer paradise image being marketed to the world. 2025/204 Erika Chandra is a Research Officer in the Malaysia Studies Programme at ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute. Thai Politics Thailand Tourism Subscribe to Fulcrum for regular updates Subscribe Post navigation PREVIOUS ARTICLE Understanding Bobby Saputra, Indonesia’s ‘Professional Son’ NEXT ARTICLE Trump Administration’s International Student Curbs Risk Undermining US Soft Power RELATED ARTICLES Why Thailand’s Constitutional Reform May Stall Purawich Watanasukh Corporal Punishment in Thai Schools Panarat Anamwathana Thailand’s State Welfare Card Reform: New Phase, Old Challenges Wannaphong Durongkaveroj Thailand’s Blue Regime: Giving No Quarter? Duncan McCargo Thailand’s Defence Budget: Money and Materiel Paul Chambers Published By FOLLOW FULCRUM Links Report vulnerability Terms of use Privacy Statement Copyright © 2025 ISEAS – Yusof Ishak Institute