Nepal’s Trans Rights Reputation Needs to be Matched With Real Policy – The Diplomat All Sections Search Read The Diplomat , Know The Asia-Pacific Central Asia East Asia Oceania South Asia Southeast Asia | Security Politics Diplomacy Economy Society Environment Opinion Features | All Regions Central Asia East Asia Oceania South Asia Southeast Asia Topics Diplomacy Economy Environment Opinion Politics Security Society Blogs ASEAN Beat Asia Defense China Power Crossroads Asia Flashpoints Oceania Pacific Money The Debate The Koreas The Pulse Tokyo Report Trans-Pacific View More Features Interviews Photo Essays Podcasts Videos Newsletter Diplomat Brief Weekly Newsletter The Diplomat Home Page About Us Contact Us Write for Us Advertise Syndicate Privacy Newsletter Subscriptions The Debate Nepal’s Trans Rights Reputation Needs to be Matched With Real Policy Recent Features Society ‘Xi, You’re Not Welcome’: As Trump Hosts China’s Leader, Thousands Protest in Washington Society What Lies Behind the Rise in Anti-Israel Sentiment in Thailand? Environment Can a Network of Miniature Sponge Cities Help Central Asia Curb Climate Change? Society Burmese Refugees in Thailand Face Fresh Deportation Threat Diplomacy Trump and Xi: Strongmen at the Temple of Thymos Society Hindutva Is Slowly Seeping Into Nepal Security Busting the Myths of the US Military’s Presence in Hawai‘i Society Abroad, India’s RSS Speaks of ‘Love.’ At Home, Its Affiliates Attack Christians. Diplomacy What’s Wrong With US Pacific Islands Policy? Environment Who Is to Blame for the Massive Death Toll in the Nepal Floods? Politics From Nomad Festival to National Showcase: Kyrgyzstan Takes Center Stage Security Fighters Without Borders: Mercenaries, Adventurers, and Volunteers in Myanmar’s Civil War Subscribe for ads-free reading The Debate | Opinion | South Asia Nepal’s Trans Rights Reputation Needs to be Matched With Real Policy The country’s LGBTIQ+ rights record is much more complicated than initially meets the eye – but we are slowly moving in the right direction. By Rukshana Kapali February 15, 2024 Credit: Depositphotos Subscribe for ads-free reading Growing up as a trans person in Nepal, I felt confused about how my identity and my country interacted. I kept reading about our amazing reputation for “LGBTI rights” globally, and how in particular on trans rights issues Nepal was a “leader.” But when I tried to change my own name and gender marker on my legal documents, I was met with roadblocks, ignorance, and rejection. Since 2021 I’ve sued the government 50 times. That’s because the truth is, Nepal’s LGBTIQ+ rights record is much more complicated than initially meets the eye – but we are slowly moving in the right direction. There have been a few Supreme Court orders on legal gender recognition, beginning with a world-famous one in 2007. The Supreme Court ordered the government to allow people to have their gender identity recognized based on self-realization. At the time, it was quite novel for a government to allow people to self-identify their legal gender. (It has become much more common now, with Argentina breaking ground in 2012, and a number of European countries following afterward). Subsequent cases in Nepal reinforced the 2007 ruling, but government officials limited changes to people who identified as a “third gender” despite the Supreme Court’s broader ruling on gender identity. It was largely assumed that “transgenders are third genders.” There was no understanding or acknowledgement of the fact that a trans woman may identify as a woman and a trans man as a man. Not everyone who does not fit into the cis-normative definitions of “man” and “woman” identified themselves as “third gender.” Moreover, even for folks who identified outside the spectrum of gender binary, not everyone agreed or preferred the term “third gender.” Moreover, the term “third gender” and “transgender” were interchangeably used. So my peers and I began working on lexicons and semantics. We started talking about words and their etymology and formation. We started writing books and creating resources about sexual orientation, gender identity, and sex characteristics, beginning from Nepala Bhasa (which is my native tongue) and Khas Bhasa (which is commonly known as “Nepali,” and unfortunately the sole official language of Nepal). Previously the term “tesrolingi” (which literally means “third gender”) was used in Khas Bhasa to refer transgender folks, which built a narrative that “transgenders are third gender.” We introduced the term “paralaingik ,” a word more like “transgender.” Before paralaingik, when we wrote “trans men are men” it would be written in Nepali as “third gender men are men,” which was confusing. The term paralaingik linguistically enabled us to advocate for legal gender recognition of trans men and trans women. Using this new language, I began filing lawsuits in 2021 – not only because the Nepali courts have upheld progressive jurisprudence on LGBTIQ+ rights, but also because other organs of the state, such as the Parliament and the government, have shown their unwillingness to address this issue. In fact, almost all of the legal progress on LGBTIQ+ rights in Nepal has been possible solely through our courts. A paper filed at the court results in a form of outcome, but numerous papers filed in respective government offices often get piled among a stack of others without any outcome. My lawsuits have borne fruit. Recently, the Supreme Court issued a writ of mandamus for the petition I filed in 2021, demanding to be recognized as a woman. (The full text of the judgment is yet to be released). As a law student and human rights advocate, I have been traveling to several High Courts across Nepal to file cases on behalf of other trans people. All of the cases that have reached a verdict thus far have had a positive outcome, contributing to strengthening transgender jurisprudence in Nepal. Nevertheless, these court filings also highlight how each individual must seek a judicial remedy if they wish to change their name and gender marker. What we need is a central directive and protocol that clarifies to all government systems how our identities are to be recognized on our legal documents – solely on the basis of our self-declaration and not, as a new Human Rights Watch report calls it, under a regime of “creeping medicalization.” These days, even though there is no law telling them to do so, government officials are demanding medical proof that a trans person has undergone surgeries before they will recognize our gender identities. This is far from the “self-feeling” standard set by the Supreme Court, and it’s insulting to our dignity. What my genitals look like is a fact about my life that is nobody’s business but my own. The government can’t oblige me to get surgery in order to legally correct my documents. If Nepal wants to continue to get recognized for its “beacon of hope” status for LGBTIQ+ rights, the government needs to create policy that enables Nepali citizens to change their name and gender marker on their documents. Already have an account? Log in . You have reached the limit of 2 free articles this month. Get to the bottom of the story Subscribe today and join thousands of diplomats, analysts, policy professionals and business readers who rely on The Diplomat for expert Asia-Pacific coverage. Get unlimited access to in-depth analysis you won't find anywhere else, from South China Sea tensions to ASEAN diplomacy to India-Pakistan relations. More than 5,000 articles a year. Unlimited articles and expert analysis Weekly newsletter with exclusive insights 16-year archive of diplomatic coverage Ad-free reading on all devices Support independent journalism Subscribe Now View Subscription Options Already have an account? Log in . Growing up as a trans person in Nepal, I felt confused about how my identity and my country interacted. I kept reading about our amazing reputation for “LGBTI rights” globally, and how in particular on trans rights issues Nepal was a “leader.” But when I tried to change my own name and gender marker on my legal documents, I was met with roadblocks, ignorance, and rejection. Since 2021 I’ve sued the government 50 times. That’s because the truth is, Nepal’s LGBTIQ+ rights record is much more complicated than initially meets the eye – but we are slowly moving in the right direction. There have been a few Supreme Court orders on legal gender recognition, beginning with a world-famous one in 2007. The Supreme Court ordered the government to allow people to have their gender identity recognized based on self-realization. At the time, it was quite novel for a government to allow people to self-identify their legal gender. (It has become much more common now, with Argentina breaking ground in 2012, and a number of European countries following afterward). Subsequent cases in Nepal reinforced the 2007 ruling, but government officials limited changes to people who identified as a “third gender” despite the Supreme Court’s broader ruling on gender identity. It was largely assumed that “transgenders are third genders.” There was no understanding or acknowledgement of the fact that a trans woman may identify as a woman and a trans man as a man. Not everyone who does not fit into the cis-normative definitions of “man” and “woman” identified themselves as “third gender.” Moreover, even for folks who identified outside the spectrum of gender binary, not everyone agreed or preferred the term “third gender.” Moreover, the term “third gender” and “transgender” were interchangeably used. So my peers and I began working on lexicons and semantics. We started talking about words and their etymology and formation. We started writing books and creating resources about sexual orientation, gender identity, and sex characteristics, beginning from Nepala Bhasa (which is my native tongue) and Khas Bhasa (which is commonly known as “Nepali,” and unfortunately the sole official language of Nepal). Previously the term “tesrolingi” (which literally means “third gender”) was used in Khas Bhasa to refer transgender folks, which built a narrative that “transgenders are third gender.” We introduced the term “paralaingik ,” a word more like “transgender.” Before paralaingik, when we wrote “trans men are men” it would be written in Nepali as “third gender men are men,” which was confusing. The term paralaingik linguistically enabled us to advocate for legal gender recognition of trans men and trans women. Using this new language, I began filing lawsuits in 2021 – not only because the Nepali courts have upheld progressive jurisprudence on LGBTIQ+ rights, but also because other organs of the state, such as the Parliament and the government, have shown their unwillingness to address this issue. In fact, almost all of the legal progress on LGBTIQ+ rights in Nepal has been possible solely through our courts. A paper filed at the court results in a form of outcome, but numerous papers filed in respective government offices often get piled among a stack of others without any outcome. My lawsuits have borne fruit. Recently, the Supreme Court issued a writ of mandamus for the petition I filed in 2021, demanding to be recognized as a woman. (The full text of the judgment is yet to be released). As a law student and human rights advocate, I have been traveling to several High Courts across Nepal to file cases on behalf of other trans people. All of the cases that have reached a verdict thus far have had a positive outcome, contributing to strengthening transgender jurisprudence in Nepal. Nevertheless, these court filings also highlight how each individual must seek a judicial remedy if they wish to change their name and gender marker. What we need is a central directive and protocol that clarifies to all government systems how our identities are to be recognized on our legal documents – solely on the basis of our self-declaration and not, as a new Human Rights Watch report calls it, under a regime of “creeping medicalization.” These days, even though there is no law telling them to do so, government officials are demanding medical proof that a trans person has undergone surgeries before they will recognize our gender identities. This is far from the “self-feeling” standard set by the Supreme Court, and it’s insulting to our dignity. What my genitals look like is a fact about my life that is nobody’s business but my own. The government can’t oblige me to get surgery in order to legally correct my documents. If Nepal wants to continue to get recognized for its “beacon of hope” status for LGBTIQ+ rights, the government needs to create policy that enables Nepali citizens to change their name and gender marker on their documents. Authors Guest Author Rukshana Kapali Rukshana Kapali is the CEO of Queer Youth Group-Nepal. Tags The Debate Opinion South Asia Nepal Nepal LGBTQ Nepal Supreme Court Nepal third gender Nepal transgender rights Subscribe for ads-free reading Advertisement Latest Stories Mongolia’s New Government Set Ambitious Goals. But Are They Realistic? From Idols to KOICA: South Korea’s Disaster Support for Nepal China’s Visibility Gap Around the Trump-Xi Summit North Korea’s Ukraine POWs Are Now in South Korea. What Comes Next? Advertisement Diplomat Brief Weekly Newsletter Get briefed on the story of the week, and developing stories to watch across the Asia-Pacific. Get the Newsletter Advertisement Related When Work Moves Without Workers: Nepal and Asia’s New Mobility Frontier By Hari KC Across Asia, governments are experimenting with policies designed to capitalize on the rapid expansion of remote work. Nepal Registers First Same-Sex Marriage By Santosh Sharma Poudel The order by the Supreme Court is interim, and the registration is temporary. Nepal has still a long way to go. In Nepal, the LGBTQ Community’s Fight for Marriage Equality is Far From Over By Jefferson He Despite a groundbreaking ruling from the Supreme Court, there is a long way to go before LGBTQ couples in this landlocked South Asian country are genuinely equal. In First, Nepal’s Supreme Court Allows Registration of Same-Sex Marriages By Binaj Gurubacharya Same-sex couples and LGBTQ rights activists in Nepal celebrated the interim court ruling. Most Read Xi Jinping Is Coming to the US. Why Is He Skipping the UNGA? By Shannon Tiezzi Xi’s coming to the U.S. East Coast while the United Nations’ biggest event is going on. That makes his absence all the more striking. Hindutva Is Slowly Seeping Into Nepal By Biswas Baral The number of Hindu-Muslim clashes is growing as India’s brand of Hindu majoritarianism gains ground in Nepal. India’s New Eye in the Sky: EOS-05 Satellite and What It Means for South Asia By Abdul Moiz Khan and Sher Ali Kakar EOS-05 is a single satellite that is part of a broader initiative of India to strengthen its ISR capabilities. The Nexperia Case Was Actually a Success. Does Europe Know That? By Sense Hofstede A combination of media misunderstandings, Chinese distortions, and Dutch mistakes raise the risk that Europeans draw the wrong conclusions about economic security. Features ‘Xi, You’re Not Welcome’: As Trump Hosts China’s Leader, Thousands Protest in Washington By Tsering Dolka Gurung Over 3,000 Tibetans, Chinese dissidents, Uyghurs, Hong Kongers, and other groups joined protests during Xi’s state visit, calling for human rights and political freedom. What Lies Behind the Rise in Anti-Israel Sentiment in Thailand? By Andrew Nachemson Nationalist rabble-rousers have accused Israelis of trying to seize Thai territory, and Israeli tourists of misbehaving or disrespecting the country's culture. Can a Network of Miniature Sponge Cities Help Central Asia Curb Climate Change? By Walt Ohnesorge and Nargiza Muratalieva In lieu of decisive regulatory action and funding, much of the work of adapting to new climate realities falls on individual gardeners and cooperatives. Burmese Refugees in Thailand Face Fresh Deportation Threat By Alex Howlett A recently-passed law increases the risk that people fleeing repression will be deported and forcibly recruited into the military’s units of "one-way troops." Latest Stories Mongolia’s New Government Set Ambitious Goals. But Are They Realistic? By Bolor Lkhaajav Data centers, the Sovereign Wealth Fund, and a hydropower plant – will any of it better the lives of Mongolian people? From Idols to KOICA: South Korea’s Disaster Support for Nepal By Titiksha Devrani Pop star donations and state aid work together to give Seoul a durable bond with Nepal. China’s Visibility Gap Around the Trump-Xi Summit By Lina Ma Xi’s U.S. visit was extensively covered by official outlets. It's much harder to gauge public opinion or even interest. North Korea’s Ukraine POWs Are Now in South Korea. What Comes Next? By Michael MacArthur Bosack Both the South Korean government and the two former soldiers face an unprecedented resettlement process. Regions Central Asia East Asia Oceania South Asia Southeast Asia Topics Diplomacy Economy Environment Opinion Politics Security Society Blogs ASEAN Beat Asia Defense China Power Crossroads Asia Flashpoints Oceania Pacific Money The Debate The Koreas The Pulse Tokyo Report Trans-Pacific View More Features Interviews Photo Essays Podcasts Videos Archives Magazine A New Japan By Other Means APAC Insider Asia Life Asia Scope China, What's Next? Indian Decade James Holmes New Emissary New Leaders Forum Sport & Culture Tech Biz Tokyo Notes Zachary Keck The Diplomat About Us Contact Us Write for Us Advertise Syndicate Terms of Use Privacy Policy Newsletters Subscriptions Newsletter Diplomat Brief Weekly Newsletter © 2026 Diplomat Media Inc. All Rights Reserved.