Luxembourg | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Luxembourg At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Legal Gender Recognition Possible? Yes LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? Yes Last Update: March 12, 2026 Luxembourg has made significant progress in legal reforms for LGBTIQ equality, although gaps remain. Same-sex couples can marry and adopt. Transgender people can change their legal gender markers on the basis of self-determination , although nonbinary gender markers are not available. Discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity is banned, but the law does not cover gender expression or sex characteristics. No legal or policy measures have been adopted to eradicate conversion practices and nonconsensual medical interventions on intersex children. In July 2025, Luxembourg’s government unveiled a comprehensive LGBTIQ+ Action Plan to advance LGBTIQ+ people’s rights, inclusion, and protection across multiple areas of society. Measures include promoting inclusion and respect, preventing discrimination, and strengthening social support structures. Local organizations and human rights bodies have criticized the plan for missing key elements—notably regarding the depathologization of trans people, the protection of intersex children from medical violence, and automatic recognition of parenthood for same-sex couples. A substantial majority of people in Luxembourg believe that LGBTIQ people should enjoy equal rights. In one survey , 75 percent of LGBTIQ respondents from Luxembourg agreed that their national government effectively fought prejudice against LGBTIQ people, which was significantly higher than the European Union average of 33 percent. Several politicians and government officials, including a prime minister, have been openly LGBTIQ. Family rejection and housing insecurity remain concerns for some LGBTIQ people. In July 2024, a petition demanding the removal of LGBTIQ topics from schools surpassed the signature threshold needed to initiate a parliamentary debate. However, a month later, a counter-petition in favor of LGBTIQ-inclusive curricula also reached the same requirement. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International