Queer Rights Group Calls for Stronger Hate Crime Legislation Close Menu Facebook X (Twitter) Instagram Facebook Instagram YouTube News Society Politics Culture Economy Nature Culture Opinions & Columns Ask Iceland Review In Focus Interviews Travel Practical Information Wildlife & Nature History & Culture Driving & Itineraries Local Attractions Tours & Activities Food & Drink Accommodation Book Tours News | Queer Rights Group Calls for Stronger Hate Crime Legislation News Queer Rights Group Calls for Stronger Hate Crime Legislation By Michael Chapman August 20, 2025 No Comments 2 Mins Read Share Facebook Twitter Pinterest LinkedIn Tumblr Email Photo: Art Bicnick. Iceland Review Share Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Pinterest Email Advertisements The number of potential hate crimes recorded by police in Iceland has risen significantly in recent years. Looking back over the last few years, sixteen cases were registered in 2023, which was triple than the figure from the year before. Police recorded eleven potential cases in 2024, and seven have already been reported so far this year. Unlike elsewhere, hate crimes are not formally defined under Icelandic law. What this means is that incidents are logged as “potential” hate crimes by the police; anything which is understood to involve prejudice based on ethnicity, religion, colour, sexual orientation, or gender identity. “Not a reality we want” According to Samtökin ’78 , Iceland’s national queer organisation, such cases have become more common since 2018, particularly those linked to gender identity. “This is of course not a reality we want to live with, and it is completely unacceptable that hate crimes that were almost unknown just ten years ago have become so common,” said Þorbjörg Þorvaldsdóttir, the organisation’s communications and publicity director, when speaking to RÚV . Asked if the figures were surprising, she added: “No, unfortunately they don’t surprise us.” During her interview, Þorbjörg argued that Iceland’s current regulations lack deterrent power. “The ’78 Association would like to see changes to the General Penal Code so that hate crimes are defined specifically. As it is now, prejudiced intent only increases the severity of a penalty, but we believe this must be investigated separately. The law needs to be changed, and more manpower must also be put into investigating these offences.” Advertisements discrimination gender identity General Penal Code hate crimes human rights Iceland Icelandic law Icelandic police lgbtq Samtökin '78 Share. Facebook Twitter Pinterest LinkedIn Tumblr Email Michael Chapman Instagram LinkedIn Former Editor-in-Chief at Iceland Review, Michael Chapman is a journalist, editor and marketing professional based in Reykjavík. He has lived in Iceland since 2016 and writes about Icelandic society, travel and culture. In previous years, he worked as an adventure guide, first as a scuba diver at Silfra Fissure and later as a cave guide in the Raufarhólshellir lava tunnel. His first book, Hidden Iceland, was published by Luster in 2022. Related Posts Heart Aerospace Unveils Larger ES-36 as Icelandair Link Remains Unclear September 27, 2026 Parents Would Enforce Iceland’s Proposed Social Media Ban September 27, 2026 Landslide Risk Continues in the Westfjords and Strandir September 27, 2026 Comments are closed. Latest News Heart Aerospace Unveils Larger ES-36 as Icelandair Link Remains Unclear September 27, 2026 Parents Would Enforce Iceland’s Proposed Social Media Ban September 27, 2026 Landslide Risk Continues in the Westfjords and Strandir September 27, 2026 Ring Road at Jökulsárlón to Close Overnight Sunday September 27, 2026 School Nurses to Begin Violence Screening for Icelandic Pupils in October September 26, 2026 Popular in Travel Fimmvörðuháls Named 10th Toughest Hike by Britain’s PureGym, Which Would Like You to Know This Iceland Review August 12, 2026 Anyone who has dragged themselves over Fimmvörðuháls may be pleased to learn that the suffering…… Is Iceland About to Experience a Total Eclipse—and Its Biggest Traffic Jam? August 11, 2026 Sneaking a Peek: Record Cruise Fleet Heads to Iceland August 10, 2026 Affordable Stays in Reykjavík | A Guide to Loft and Dalur Hostels July 23, 2026 About Us Established in 1963, Iceland Review is the longest-running English-language media outlet covering Iceland. Facebook Instagram YouTube Most Popular Icelandair Plans September Flight Cancellations if Strike Proceeds September 17, 2026 Icelandair Mechanics Vote for Indefinite Strike from September 23 September 15, 2026 Mediation Talks Fail as Icelandair Mechanics Strike Nears September 19, 2026 About 3,000 Passengers Rebook as Icelandair Mechanics Strike Nears September 22, 2026 Popular in Travel 255-Year-Old Coin Linked to Sveinn Pálsson Found in Öræfi September 7, 2026 New Geothermal Bathing Lagoon Opens in Hveragerði September 7, 2026 Gas Pollution Persists at Múlakvísl as Conductivity Remains Elevated September 4, 2026 Skip the Line: Keflavík Fast-Track Security Is Now Open to Everyone August 27, 2026 © 2026 Iceland Review About Iceland Review Privacy and Cookie policy Submit Type above and press Enter to search. Press Esc to cancel. Manage your privacy To provide the best experiences, we and our partners use technologies like cookies to store and/or access device information. Consenting to these technologies will allow us and our partners to process personal data such as browsing behavior or unique IDs on this site and show (non-) personalized ads. Not consenting or withdrawing consent, may adversely affect certain features and functions. Click below to consent to the above or make granular choices. Your choices will be applied to this site only. You can change your settings at any time, including withdrawing your consent, by using the toggles on the Cookie Policy, or by clicking on the manage consent button at the bottom of the screen. Functional Functional Always active The technical storage or access is strictly necessary for the legitimate purpose of enabling the use of a specific service explicitly requested by the subscriber or user, or for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission of a communication over an electronic communications network. Preferences Preferences The technical storage or access is necessary for the legitimate purpose of storing preferences that are not requested by the subscriber or user. Statistics Statistics The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for statistical purposes. The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for anonymous statistical purposes. Without a subpoena, voluntary compliance on the part of your Internet Service Provider, or additional records from a third party, information stored or retrieved for this purpose alone cannot usually be used to identify you. Marketing Marketing The technical storage or access is required to create user profiles to send advertising, or to track the user on a website or across several websites for similar marketing purposes. Statistics Marketing Features Always active Always active Manage options Manage services Manage {vendor_count} vendors Read more about these purposes Accept Deny Manage options Save preferences Manage options {title} {title} {title} Manage your privacy To provide the best experiences, we use technologies like cookies to store and/or access device information. Consenting to these technologies will allow us to process data such as browsing behavior or unique IDs on this site. Not consenting or withdrawing consent, may adversely affect certain features and functions. Functional Functional Always active The technical storage or access is strictly necessary for the legitimate purpose of enabling the use of a specific service explicitly requested by the subscriber or user, or for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission of a communication over an electronic communications network. Preferences Preferences The technical storage or access is necessary for the legitimate purpose of storing preferences that are not requested by the subscriber or user. Statistics Statistics The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for statistical purposes. The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for anonymous statistical purposes. Without a subpoena, voluntary compliance on the part of your Internet Service Provider, or additional records from a third party, information stored or retrieved for this purpose alone cannot usually be used to identify you. Marketing Marketing The technical storage or access is required to create user profiles to send advertising, or to track the user on a website or across several websites for similar marketing purposes. Statistics Marketing Features Always active Always active Manage options Manage services Manage {vendor_count} vendors Read more about these purposes Accept Deny Manage options Save preferences Manage options {title} {title} {title} Manage consent Manage consent