Faroe Islands MP refuses to dine with Iceland's gay prime minister and her partner | PinkNews About Us Advertise Work with us Login Register Latest News View all UK US World Health Politics Sport Business Culture View all TV Film Celebrity Drag Theatre Music Gaming Lifestyle View all Beauty Careers Fashion Relationships Travel Shopping View all Deals Recommended Fashion & Beauty Tickets Video View all News & Politics Entertainment Lifestyle Discover Trans Awareness Week Drag Race Explainers The Queer Agenda Toggle menu Account Register Login Current Affairs Faroe Islands MP refuses to dine with Iceland’s gay prime minister and her partner Sep 07 2010 Written by Christopher Brocklebank Share Save for later Comment Jóhanna Sigurðardóttir became the world’s first out gay prime minister in 2009. (Getty Images) An MP from the Faroe Islands has refused to attend a state banquet held in honour of Icelandic prime minister Jóhanna Sigurðardóttir’s official visit. The prime minister of the Faroe Islands, Kaj Leo Johannesen, invited all seven of the Faroe Island’s party leaders to dine with Ms Sigurðardóttir and her wife, Jonina Leonsdottir. However, Jenis av Rana MP, leader of The Centre Party, a Christianity-based conservative party, declined the invitation, reportedly saying it was against his religion and that he wouldn’t “dream of attending such a banquet”. In a statement on his party’s website, Mr av Rana wrote: “Logmadur [prime minister] has sent all party leaders an invitation to dine with Iceland’s prime minister and her female partner . . . The Centre party will not be represented at the dinner. “I do not make a habit of going out in the evening unless my wife is also invited. I would much rather stay at home with her. This is not new behaviour, it’s been like this for years. No one should be surprised.” He also added that he considered the couple’s visit to be a direct provocation to the beliefs of Faroese society. The incident has sparked controversy in both Iceland and the Faroe Islands. Ossur Skarpheðinsson, Iceland’s foreign minister, publicly condemned Mr av Rana’s comments as “disgraceful”. The Chairman of the Faroese Republican party, Hogny Hoydal, along with PM Johanneson, stated that Mr av Rana’s views did not represent those of the whole Faroese nation. The Faroe Islands – an autonomous constituent country within the Kingdom of Denmark – and Iceland have a long-standing cultural relationship, sharing an near-identical language and remarkably similar history. However, this is not the first time the relationship between the two countries has hit rocky ground: back in 2006, Icelandic MP for Social Democratic Alliance, Rannveig Gudmundsdottir, criticised Faroese parliament for rejecting proposals designed to offer protection against discrimination on the basis of sexuality. The case received widespread publicity in the Scandinavian press and is today widely credited for the special protections against discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation which are now enshrined in Faroese law. On his blog, Faroese Christian writer Arni Zachariassen wrote an open letter of apology to PM Sigurðardóttir saying he felt the situation was “saddening and embarrassing”. Mr Zachariassen wrote: “I know that I speak for the majority of Faroese Christians when I say that you are more than welcome to visit our country and if the occasion arose, you and your wife both would be more than welcome to eat at our tables.” More: Europe Faroe Islands Iceland Johanna Sigurdardottir Queer News. Straight Up. The LGBTQ+ stories you don’t want to miss, delivered to your inbox daily. Email address required Must be valid email Register By registering you agree to our Privacy Policy Thanks for registering! You can update your email subscriptions at any time in the My profile section of your account. Dec 31 2024 Every celebrity who came out as LGBTQ+ in 2024 Related articles Politics Aug 16 2019 Christian MP wants to roll back same-sex marriage to ‘correct wrongdoings’ UK Sep 08 2017 Couple accidentally become first to marry in Faroe Islands Current Affairs Jun 19 2017 Denmark approves same-sex marriage in the Faroe Islands Community Aug 05 2016 World’s only openly gay Prime Minister visits Orlando to pay respects Current Affairs Apr 29 2016 Faroe Islands legalises same-sex marriage Latest News Previous Next Celebrity Sep 25 Trans influencer calls out Nikki Glaser for stand-up joke about what’s ‘in her pants’ Culture Sep 25 Trans pro wrestling trailblazer Gisele Shaw signs exclusive NWA contract Bisexual Sep 25 The Traitors star Freddie Fraser’s mum’s emotional response to his coming out Celebrity Sep 25 Lili Reinhart says Hollywood ‘too afraid’ to greenlight lesbian vampire project Celebrity Sep 25 Carly Rae Jepsen describes moment Heated Rivalry inspired her son’s name Celebrity Sep 25 John Green ‘heartbroken’ for trans Harry Potter fans as he talks JK Rowling Current Affairs Sep 25 JD Vance claims James Talarico has a “weird obsession with children in drag” News Sep 25 Susan Sarandon, Hannah Einbinder and Caleb Hearon detained outside UN after protesting Netanyahu What to buy now Previous Next Fashion Mar 27 Connor Ives and MAC team up to re-release the iconic ‘Protect The Dolls’ t-shirt Music Mar 12 The Pussycat Dolls confirm reunion with new single and tour – how to get tickets Music Jan 23 A full guide to the 2026 Harry Styles Together, Together tour including dates and presale info Shopping Nov 24 2025 Ten truly awesome Christmas gifts you can buy to support queer-owned businesses Trans Sep 09 2025 Lush creates ‘luxurious’ trans flag bath bomb to support trans charities Tickets Jun 25 2025 Dolly Parton announces mini Las Vegas residency after wrapping her last tour almost a decade ago Shopping May 15 2025 LEGO celebrates late gay icon Keith Haring with new art set: ‘Want this so bad’ Music Apr 18 2025 Primavera Sound’s most iconic queer performances, from Troye Sivan to Ethel Cain Exclusive Previous Next Exclusive Sep 11 Ania Magliano talks SNL UK season two and anti-LGBTQ voices in comedy: ‘We do edgy in the right way’ Exclusive Sep 11 Elliot Tuttle on Blue Film’s personal inspiration, rejection and taboo: ‘It’s about loneliness’ Exclusive Sep 09 OF star Andy Lee on love for gay fans, ‘poisonous’ creators and ‘harmful’ stunts: ‘Gay men lift me up every day’ Exclusive Sep 07 Real Housewives of London spill the tea: ‘She’d go to the opening of a packet of crisps’ Opinion Sep 04 Katseye in London: A showcase of real talent deserving of the deafening screams Exclusive Sep 02 Adrian Chiarella and Joe Bird on tackling conversion therapy in gay horror Leviticus Exclusive Aug 21 Sziget Festival drag and circus troupe want audiences to feel like family Exclusive Aug 20 Gay wrestler Anthony Bowens says Heated Rivalry shows authentic life of closeted athletes Register to save articles and more. It'll only take a minute and it's free. JOIN US TODAY! Already have an account? Log in here "/> Download the PinkNews app Award winning LGBTQ+ journalism About us Editorial Policy Contact us Advertise Work for us Terms and conditions Privacy policy Privacy manager Privacy Manager