Belarus transgender rights organization says authorities detained over 15 LGBTQ+ individuals - JURIST - News DONATE NOW News ▾ All Legal News US Legal News World Legal News This Day @ Law Dispatches ▾ All Dispatches Afghanistan Canada EU Ghana India Iran Israel Italy Kazakhstan Kenya Myanmar Pakistan Peru Romania Sri Lanka Taiwan UK Ukraine US Commentary ▾ All Commentary Faculty Commentary Professional Commentary Student Commentary Features ▾ All Features Explainers Long Reads Multimedia Interviews Topics Rule of Law ▾ Materials Podcasts About ▾ FAQ Staff Awards Apply Journalist in Residence Board of Directors Contact Us Donate ▾ Why Support JURIST? Donate Honor Roll Search: Search News Filmbetrachter / Pixabay Belarus transgender rights organization says authorities detained over 15 LGBTQ+ individuals Ashley Wong | Chinese U. Hong Kong Faculty of Law, CN/HK September 28, 2024 04:08:37 am Belarus transgender rights organization TG House Belarus said on Friday that more than 15 LGBTQ+ individuals, including eight transgender individuals, were detained by the Belarusian authorities in the past month. According to TG House Belarus, the individuals were arrested in several Belarusian cities for allegedly subscribing to extremist resources. TG House Belarus stated that most of the eight transgender individuals were charged for hooliganism and two individuals were charged for pornography. The organization also stated that the detainees were subjected to physical and psychological abuse and some were forced to flee the country. On February 19, Prosecutor General of Belarus Andrei Shved announced that the Belarus government had been preparing a bill that would punish the promotion of what they deemed to be non-traditional relationships. He stated that it was important to not allow the discussion of the topic and that opponents were attempting to destroy traditional family values and, by extension, Belarus as a nation. Relatedly, on August 5, the Council of the EU announced that existing sanctions would extend to 28 new individuals for participating in “ongoing internal repression and human rights violations in Belarus.” The 28 individuals, who were listed in a regulation on July 16, included Belarusian government officials, operators of correctional institutions, and members of the state-run media. EU sanctions against Belarus were initially drafted in response to repression of protests following the elections in 2020. The sanctions have been expanded and extended due to charges of ongoing human rights violations. The EU has stated that the purpose of the sanctions was to “put pressure on Belarusian political leadership to prevent further violence and repression.” GET OUR DAILY DIGEST Email Address Subscribe Key: Subscribe Latest DISPATCHES Pakistan dispatch: Supreme Court defers jailed former PM’s medical case amid jurisdictional dispute Taiwan dispatch: motion for retrial filed over 2000 execution amid miscarriage of justice concerns Latest COMMENTARY Can the US Keep a Diplomat Out of the UN? by Matthew R. Morley | Morley & Associates | US | Russia The Rule of Law Has Been Miserable to Measure. That Just Changed. by David Stasior | Broken Scales Latest FEATURES ‘Accountability Is Deferred Rather Than Delivered’ — Conflict Resolution Scholar Johannes Langer on Mediation, Amnesty, and the Limits of the ICC ‘Genocide denial is often a state project’ — Iva Vukušić on Srebrenica and the politics of memory THIS DAY @ LAW Warren Commission report on the Kennedy assassination released On September 27, 1964, the report of the Warren Commission chaired by Chief Justice Earl Warren on the Kennedy assassination was released. The report essentially concluded that Lee Harvey Oswald had acted alone. Review the Report of the President's Commission on the Assassination of President Kennedy . WWII Axis Powers formed On September 27, 1940, Chancellor Adolf Hitler of Germany, Foreign Minister Galeazzo Ciano of Italy and Ambassador Saburo Kurusu of Japan signed the Tripartite Pact , creating the World War II alliance of the Axis Powers. The Pact was later assented to by other members of the Axis, including Hungary, Romania, Croatia, Slovakia, Bulgaria, and the Kingdom of Yugoslavia. Home Attributions Disclaimer Privacy Policy Contact Us Copyright © 2026, JURIST Legal News & Research Services, Inc. JURISTnews is a collaboration with the University of Pittsburgh