Egypt’s Fourth Cycle UPR: The Right to Health for Transgender and Intersex Individuals - The Tahrir Institute for Middle East Policy | عربي Donate Donate Analysis THEMES Arts & Culture Development & Economy Digital & Cyberspace Energy & Environment Governance & Politics Law & Accountability Media & Press Migration & Displacement Social Movements Security & Conflict Gender & Sexuality Religious & Ethnic Minorities COUNTRIES Egypt Lebanon Sudan Syria Tunisia Fellowships Bassem Sabry Fellowship Nonresident Fellowship Legal Unit Programs and Projects Inclusive Economies Program The Arab Uprisings 15 Years On Projects & Reports Events Media Press Room Join Us Jobs & Fellowships Internships Write for Us About TIMEP Contributors | عربي | عربي Donate Analysis THEMES Arts & Culture Development & Economy Digital & Cyberspace Energy & Environment Governance & Politics Law & Accountability Media & Press Migration & Displacement Social Movements Security & Conflict Gender & Sexuality Religious & Ethnic Minorities COUNTRIES Egypt Lebanon Sudan Syria Tunisia Fellowships Bassem Sabry Fellowship Nonresident Fellowship Legal Unit Programs and Projects Inclusive Economies Program The Arab Uprisings 15 Years On Projects & Reports Events Media Press Room Join Us Jobs & Fellowships Internships Write for Us About TIMEP Contributors Gender & Sexuality Law & Accountability Egypt Egypt’s Fourth Cycle UPR: The Right to Health for Transgender and Intersex Individuals In the framework of Egypt’s 4th UPR cycle, TIMEP and Cairo 52 Legal Research Institute have submitted an alternate report to the UPR Working Group regarding the discriminatory laws, policies, and practices that prevent transgender and intersex individuals in Egypt from the full enjoyment of their fundamental right to health. TIMEP January 6, 2025 January 6, 2025 Transgender and intersex individuals in Egypt face discriminatory laws, policies, and practices that violate their fundamental right to health. Since Egypt’s last Universal Periodic Review (UPR) cycle, these individuals have continued to encounter significant barriers to accessing equitable health services. Discrimination based on gender identity and sexual orientation remains pervasive, limiting the ability of transgender and intersex people to receive the healthcare they need. In the framework of Egypt’s fourth UPR cycle, the Tahrir Institute for Middle East Policy, together with Cairo 52 Legal Research Institute, have submitted an alternate report to the UPR Working Group regarding the discriminatory laws, policies, and practices that prevent transgender and intersex individuals in Egypt from the full enjoyment of their fundamental right to health. The submission highlights how Egypt’s current medical policies fail to provide equal access to healthcare services for transgender and intersex individuals. In addition, there is a glaring lack of resources, equipment, and training for healthcare providers, which hinders their ability to effectively care for these populations. Moreover, the Egyptian government has not implemented anti-discrimination measures or public education campaigns to protect transgender and intersex people from stigma, harassment, and discrimination. These shortcomings contribute to the continued marginalization of transgender and intersex individuals, undermining their constitutionally protected rights to health and equality. The submission encourages states to make recommendations during the current UPR cycle to address these concerns and ensure that Egypt commits to its constitutional and international legal obligations, supported recommendations, and voluntary pledges made since the last review. The Right to Health for Transgender and Intersex Individuals in Egypt: Joint UPR Alternate Report The Right to Health for Transgender and Intersex Individuals in Egypt: UPR Advocacy Fact Sheet The UPR is a mechanism of the UN created to examine the human rights records of all UN member states. It presents a unique opportunity for civil society organizations to underscore and highlight critical human rights issues taking place in the country under review, identify recommendations the country should implement in response, and hold the country to account under its international legal obligations. Egypt underwent its first UPR cycle in February 2010, its second in October 2014, and its third in November 2019. Egypt’s fourth UPR cycle is set to take place in January 2025. READ NEXT Law & Accountability Social Movements Lebanon Egypt Syria September 10, 2026 The Path to Justice 15 Years Since the Arab Uprisings: What’s Next? August 27, 2026 by TIMEP September 10, 2026 10:00 am by TIMEP September 10, 2026 10:00 am Law & Accountability Lebanon January 1, 1970 How Can Lebanon Get Out of its Financial Crisis? August 26, 2026 Activist and lawyer Fouad Debs outlines five key steps Lebanon needs to take to emerge from… by TIMEP August 26, 2026 by TIMEP August 26, 2026 Law & Accountability Lebanon January 1, 1970 Lebanon, Israel, and the Battle for Accountability June 18, 2026 Joining the International Criminal Court is one viable path for Lebanon to pursue accountability for Israeli… by Shehrazade El-Hajjar June 18, 2026 by Shehrazade El-Hajjar June 18, 2026 info@timep.org 1717 K Street NW Ste 900, Washington, DC 20006 Analysis Fellowships Legal Unit Projects Events Join Us About Stay connected, sign up! © 2026 The Tahrir Institute for Middle East Policy