Safety and security - Czechia travel advice - GOV.UK Cookies on GOV.UK We use some essential cookies to make this website work. We’d like to set additional cookies to understand how you use GOV.UK, remember your settings and improve government services. We also use cookies set by other sites to help us deliver content from their services. You have accepted additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. You have rejected additional cookies. You can change your cookie settings at any time. Accept additional cookies Reject additional cookies View cookies Hide cookie message Skip to main content GOV.UK Navigation menu Menu Menu Services and information Benefits Births, death, marriages and care Business and self-employed Childcare and parenting Citizenship and living in the UK Crime, justice and the law Disabled people Driving and transport Education and learning Employing people Environment and countryside Housing and local services Money and tax Passports, travel and living abroad Visas and immigration Working, jobs and pensions Government activity Departments Departments, agencies and public bodies News News stories, speeches, letters and notices Guidance and regulation Detailed guidance, regulations and rules Research and statistics Reports, analysis and official statistics Policy papers and consultations Consultations and strategy Transparency Data, Freedom of Information releases and corporate reports Search GOV.UK × Search GOV.UK Search Search GOV.UK Search Home Passports, travel and living abroad Travel abroad Foreign travel advice Foreign travel advice Czechia Contents Warnings and insurance Entry requirements Safety and security Health Getting help Subscriptions Get email alerts Safety and security Terrorism There is a high threat of terrorist attack globally affecting UK interests and British nationals, including from groups and individuals who view the UK and British nationals as targets. Stay aware of your surroundings at all times. UK Counter Terrorism Policing has information and advice on staying safe abroad and what to do in the event of a terrorist attack. Find out how to reduce your risk from terrorism while abroad . Terrorism in Czechia Terrorist attacks in Czechia cannot be ruled out. You should be aware of the global risk of indiscriminate terrorist attacks which could be in public places, including in places frequented by expatriates and foreign travellers. Political situation Public protests may happen at short notice. These have been peaceful but take care in crowded places and follow the instructions of local authorities. Crime If you are victim of crime, immediately call 112 for assistance. Protecting yourself and your belongings Petty theft is a problem, especially in major tourist areas in Prague. There is a risk of pickpocketing: on busy metro and bus routes from Prague airport to the city centre on trams to popular tourist sites like Prague Castle in busy tourist areas Take care of yourself and your belongings in the same way as you would do in the UK. Avoid leaving your belongings unattended. Report thefts in person to the nearest Czech police station within 24 hours and get a police report crime number for insurance purposes. Prague police station (Jungmannovo namesti 9, Prague 1, nearest metro stop is Mustek) is open 24 hours a day and would provide English speaking interpreters. You can also get a police report from the police station at the airport. See Prague police station contact details (in Czech). Every lamppost in Prague has a 6-digit number posted at eye level. These codes will help you tell the police where you are if you cannot give them an exact address. Drink spiking There is a risk of drink spiking in bars and clubs. Be careful not to take drinks from strangers or leave your drinks unattended. Scams Beware of criminals pretending to be plainclothes policemen who ask to see your foreign currency and passport. Czech police officers do not have the right to do this. Do not show them your money. Instead, offer to go with them to the nearest police station. You can also call 112 to check their identity. Travelling in groups If you’re travelling in a group, keep a note of your hotel phone number and address in case you are separated. Leave contact details with a friend or relative in the UK. Prague safety issues Prague city police advise visitors to: always change money at a currency exchange or bank rather than on the street as this money is often counterfeit take care when using cash machines avoid contact with sex workers be aware of consumption charges in night clubs as they are often high be careful with consumption cards, which carry high financial penalties if you lose them before you pay your bill Laws and cultural differences Personal ID It is a legal requirement to carry ID. Always carry your passport. The police may fine or arrest you if you do not. They will normally accept a scan of your passport if you have not committed a crime. Drunken and offensive behaviour Stag groups are not allowed to enter some city centre bars and restaurants. You may be arrested or fined for drunken or offensive behaviour. Police may take you to ‘sober-up’ facilities for a temporary period, and you will have to pay for your stay. Illegal drugs The possession, sale and distribution of drugs, including cannabis, is illegal, and the drugs are often dangerous counterfeits. Some shops, particularly in Prague, advertise ‘cannabis products’, which contain trace amounts of THC permissible under Czech law. You should expect severe penalties such as a long jail sentence and heavy fines for possessing, using or smuggling illegal drugs, including when transiting through the airport. Convictions carry sentences of up to 18 years. Airports in Czechia have excellent technology and security for detecting illegal items. This is also used to scan the baggage of transiting passengers. LGBT+ travellers Same-sex relationships and civil partnerships are legal in Czechia, but same-sex marriages are not recognised in Czech law. Registered same-sex partnerships are awaiting presidential approval. Same-sex couples showing affection in public could receive unwanted attention. Read more advice for LGBT+ travellers . Surrogacy It is illegal to earn money from a surrogacy arrangement. The police may charge you if you are: a surrogate mother a British national who plans to take a child born through surrogacy an agent organising the handover FCDO advises against making surrogacy arrangements in Czechia or moving surrogacy arrangements from other countries. You should get specialist legal advice in the UK and Czechia. See surrogacy arrangements in foreign countries . Transport risks Road travel If you are planning to drive in Czechia, see information on driving abroad and check the rules of the road in the RAC’s Czechia guide . The guide lists driving regulations and other legal requirements you need to be aware of. You can use a UK photocard driving licence to drive in Czechia. If you still have a paper driving licence, you may need to update it to a photocard licence or get the correct version of the international driving permit ( IDP ) as well. Hire car companies often have stricter requirements for their customers, such as a year of driving experience, a higher minimum age and holding an IDP . Check if you need a UK sticker to drive your car outside the UK . If you are visiting Czechia, you may be able to use your Blue Badge in some circumstances. Check local parking rules. Drink-driving is a serious offence in Czechia. If you are tested and found to have any alcohol or drugs in your system, you may face a fine of up to 50,000 Czech koruna, confiscation of your licence and possible imprisonment. The Czech police can ask any driver to take a breathalyser test on the spot. Taxis It’s safer to use a major taxi company than to pick one up in the street. Some taxis charge high prices. Always check the rates on the side of the taxi before getting in. Beware of drivers pretending to be taxi services but offering rides in unmarked cars and overcharging for journeys. See information on using Uber at Prague airport , including how to book through the app, at a self-service kiosk or at service counters. Booking through a kiosk is usually slightly more expensive. Buses and trams See Prague public transport information and journey planner in English. Be careful near tram tracks and make sure you look both ways as trams cannot stop quickly. Trams have the right of way on zebra crossings. You may get a fine if you do not cross roads and tram tracks at pedestrian crossings. You can also get a fine if you cross when the pedestrian crossing light is not green. You must validate your ticket in a ticket machine before starting a journey on public transport. You do not need to validate tickets bought from self-service terminals on trams and buses. Officials patrol public transport and will issue an on-the-spot fine of 1,000 Czech koruna (around £35) if you do not hold a validated ticket. If fined, you should get a receipt. If you cannot pay immediately, the police can get involved and the fine could increase to 1,500 koruna. The 30 and 90-minute journey adult tickets for bus, tram and metro are not valid on the Petřín Hill funicular railway in Prague. You need a specific 60-koruna ticket from the vending machines at funicular railway stops, or a 24-hour ticket (or longer). Extreme weather and natural disasters Find out what you can do to prepare for and respond to extreme weather and natural hazards . You can access local forecasts and weather warnings for Czechia. Follow the instructions of local authorities. Previous : Entry requirements Next : Health View a printable version of the whole guide Related content About Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office travel advice Travel or do business in Europe: Brexit guidance Support for British nationals abroad Foreign travel checklist UK help and services in Czechia Explore the topic Living in Czechia Travelling to Czechia Is this page useful? Maybe Yes this page is useful No this page is not useful Thank you for your feedback Report a problem with this page Help us improve GOV.UK Do not include personal or financial information like your National Insurance number or credit card details. This field is for robots only. Please leave blank What were you doing? What went wrong? Send Cancel Help us improve GOV.UK To help us improve GOV.UK, we’d like to know more about your visit today. Please fill in this survey (opens in a new tab and requires JavaScript ) . Cancel Services and information Benefits Births, death, marriages and care Business and self-employed Childcare and parenting Citizenship and living in the UK Crime, justice and the law Disabled people Driving and transport Education and learning Employing people Environment and countryside Housing and local services Money and tax Passports, travel and living abroad Visas and immigration Working, jobs and pensions Government activity Departments News Guidance and regulation Research and statistics Policy papers and consultations Transparency How government works Get involved Support links Help Privacy Cookies Accessibility statement Contact Terms and conditions Rhestr o Wasanaethau Cymraeg Government Digital Service All content is available under the Open Government Licence v3.0 , except where otherwise stated © Crown copyright