Serbia Investigates Allegations of Police Assault on Two LGBT People | Balkan Insight Back to BalkanInsight About Premium Subscription Newsletters Contact Follow us Search Countries Albania Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Greece Kosovo Moldova Montenegro North Macedonia Romania Serbia Turkey In Focus Balkan Transitional Justice Reporting Democracy Focus on Ukraine Focus on Gender Justice Balkan Migrant Route Balkan Media Watch Digital Rights Bulgaria-North Macedonia dispute Paper Trail: Investigations Russia in the Balkans Turkey and the Balkans Open Data and E-Governance China in the Balkans Focus on Far Right Environment Serbia-Kosovo Relations News Premium All Opinions Analysis Investigations Profiles Features Interviews Subscribe Newsletters Sign in News Serbia Investigates Allegations of Police Assault on Two LGBT People Sasa Dragojlo Belgrade BIRN February 27, 2024 11:47 Serbia’s Interior Ministry said the Prosecutor's Office is probing allegations that police officers assaulted and humiliated two LGBT people during a drugs raid on an apartment in Belgrade. An activist holds a rainbow colored umbrella as police officers stand guard ahead of the EuroPride march in Belgrade, Serbia, 17 September 2022. EPA-EFE/ANDREJ CUKIC Serbia’s Interior Ministry said on Monday that the Prosecutor’s Office is investigating the alleged assault by police officers in Belgrade after a complaint from LGBT rights organisation Da se zna (Let it be Known). “The internal control section informed the relevant prosecutor’s office, by order of which the veracity of the allegations in the complaint is being determined,” the Interior Ministry told Radio Free Europe. It added that “if it is found that [the police officers] exceeded their powers, will be sanctioned in accordance with the law”. The ministry acted after Da se zna alleged that police officers beat and humiliated two LGBT people during a search of an apartment in the Serbian capital. Da se Zna representative Bojan Lazic said on Monday that the police raided the apartment on February 14. He described the incident as “the most difficult case that the organisation has recorded in its eight years of existence”. Lazic said the police broke into the apartment, allegedly because of a report that there were drugs inside. The search was allegedly carried out by police special forces officers who did not show a warrant. According to Lazic, a young man and women suffered physical injuries, as well as severe psychological trauma. “They saw the LGBT+ flag and from that moment, the brutal experience began,” he said, stressing that the violence continued in the police station after their arrest. He said that the officers insulted the young man, called him derogatory names, told him that he should be killed, touched his genitals and simulated oral sex using his head. According to Lazic, they also insulted his roommate, the young woman, and hit them, inflicting physical injuries. Sanja Malinovic, the mother of the young man who was allegedly assaulted, described the police’s behaviour as brutal. Malinovic said that her son was beaten, insulted and threatened with rape until he confessed that he was gay, and that instead of using handcuffs, the police officers tied him up with a rope. They also video-recorded their behaviour on a mobile phone and shared the recordings amongt themselves. She also alleged that a policeman put his hand in her son’s trousers and pulled his penis, which she described as a sexual assault. Malinovic said that police telephoned her during the night after the assault and that an inspector told her: “Mummy, you’re going to find out what your little son likes.” The Interior Ministry insisted that police officers and members of an intervention unit entered the apartment to search it on the basis of a court order. The police also announced that the Prosecutor’s Office, after an expert examination, filed two criminal charges alleging the unauthorised possession of narcotics. Da se zna, which provides legal and psychological support to LGBT people in Serbia, documented more than 80 cases of violence and discrimination against members of the community in 2023. Freedom of Speech Human Rights LGBT rights Police brutality Serbia Serbian Ministry of Interior Related Articles January 24, 2024 Moldova’s Transnistria Announces Anti-LGBT Drive in ‘Year of Family’ September 15, 2023 Struggle for Acceptance: Kosovo Societal Stigma Challenges LGBT Community’s Mental Health May 11, 2023 LGBT Watchdog Chides Balkan, Central Europe Countries for Rights Setbacks Sasa Dragojlo VIEW ALL POSTS Latest premium September 25, 2026 Review Week in Review: Spyware, AI and Arrests September 25, 2026 Video ARTE Europe Weekly: Datacentres and Hidden Cost of Digital Progress September 25, 2026 Review Democracy Digest: Czechia Restricts Rules for Russian Diplomats Travelling September 25, 2026 Feature Fading Away: Sicily’s Ancient Albanian Community Fears its Identity Risks Erasure September 25, 2026 Opinion Bringing the Balkans into Schengen: a Win-Win Scenario for Europe Subscribe to Premium Content Most popular September 24, 2026 Opinion Albania’s Cannabis Traffic is No Longer Only One-Way September 22, 2026 News Albania's Intelligence Chief Suspended for Allegedly Aiding Crime Group September 23, 2026 Investigation Netanyahu Lawyer Part of Operation to Build Israeli Drones in Serbia September 25, 2026 Review Week in Review: Spyware, AI and Arrests September 23, 2026 Opinion As Geopolitical Competition Intensifies, the EU’s Balkans Policy Must Adapt About About Us The Team Supporters and Partners Awards Subscription Premium Subscription Personal Subscription Institutional Subscription Student Subscription Terms & Policies General Terms of Use Personal Terms of Use Institutional Terms of Use Privacy Policy Cookie Policy Copyright Notice Republishing Policy Community Guidelines Editorial Standards Editorial Corrections & Complaints Letters to the Editor Engage Newsletters RSS Feeds Contact Services BIRN Consultancy Follow us Copyright BIRN 2026 | Powered by WordPress / WPML Published by BIRN Manage Consent To provide the best experiences, we and our partners use technologies like cookies to store and/or access device information. Consenting to these technologies will allow us and our partners to process personal data such as browsing behavior or unique IDs on this site and show (non-) personalized ads. Not consenting or withdrawing consent, may adversely affect certain features and functions. Click below to consent to the above or make granular choices. Your choices will be applied to this site only. You can change your settings at any time, including withdrawing your consent, by using the toggles on the Cookie Policy, or by clicking on the manage consent button at the bottom of the screen. Functional Functional Always active The technical storage or access is strictly necessary for the legitimate purpose of enabling the use of a specific service explicitly requested by the subscriber or user, or for the sole purpose of carrying out the transmission of a communication over an electronic communications network. Preferences Preferences The technical storage or access is necessary for the legitimate purpose of storing preferences that are not requested by the subscriber or user. Statistics Statistics The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for statistical purposes. The technical storage or access that is used exclusively for anonymous statistical purposes. Without a subpoena, voluntary compliance on the part of your Internet Service Provider, or additional records from a third party, information stored or retrieved for this purpose alone cannot usually be used to identify you. Marketing Marketing The technical storage or access is required to create user profiles to send advertising, or to track the user on a website or across several websites for similar marketing purposes. Statistics Marketing Features Always active Always active Manage options Manage services Manage {vendor_count} vendors Read more about these purposes Accept Deny View preferences Save preferences View preferences {title} {title} {title} Manage consent