Gay family recognised by state in Ecuador in historic decision | PinkNews About Us Advertise Work with us Login Register Latest News View all UK US World Health Politics Sport Business Culture View all TV Film Celebrity Drag Theatre Music Gaming Lifestyle View all Beauty Careers Fashion Relationships Travel Shopping View all Deals Recommended Fashion & Beauty Tickets Video View all News & Politics Entertainment Lifestyle Discover Trans Awareness Week Drag Race Explainers The Queer Agenda Toggle menu Account Register Login Current Affairs Gay family recognised by state in Ecuador in historic decision May 31 2018 Written by Lydia Smith Share Save for later Comment )Image: RODRIGO BUENDIA/AFP/GettyImages) A seven-year-old girl will be registered with both surnames of her two mothers in Ecuador, in a move hailed by campaigners as step forward for the recognition of LGBT families in the country. The Constitutional Court ordered the Civil Registry office to register Satya Amani Bicknell Rothon, the daughter of couple Helen Bicknell and Nicola Rothon. The case had been ongoing since September 2012. At a press conference after the decision, Bicknell said: “We knew we were going to win but we did not know when. People take part in the Gay Pride Parade in Quito (RODRIGO BUENDIA/AFP/Getty) “This is the result of a collective effort,” she added. One of the lawyer’s involved in the case, Jose Luis Guerra, said failing to register the child’s name was in violation of her rights, TeleSUR English reported. Guerra added the move was significant in recognising the diversity of families in Ecuador . Ecuador’s Constitutional Tribunal repealed the law that criminalised same-sex sexual relations between consenting adults in 1997. In 2015, Ecuador passed an amendment to its Civil Code which legalised same-sex civil unions . Yolanda Herrera, an Ecuadorian lawyer with a focus on LGBT rights, told TeleSUR English that there are still issues around adoption and surrogacy despite the recognition of civil unions. An LGBT activist protests against discrimination in Ecuador with “public kiss” demonstration (AFP/Getty) “There are legal loopholes that are up in the air, like the affiliation of the child of a same-sex couple that decides to have children,” she said. “Today, those two mothers cannot [both] be registered, or in the case of surrogate mothers for two fathers, they cannot register their children. Only the person that gives birth [will be registered].” The country passed a law in 2016 allowing people to choose their preferred gender on their ID cards. Discrimination against the LGBT+ community remains an issue in Ecuador, however, with activists recently calling for an end to gay conversion therapy in the country. Ecuador banned the practice, according to the International Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Trans and Intersex Association (ILGA), but activists say gay Ecuadorians are still subjected to it. Conversion therapy has been widely discredited by health experts for risking causing emotional and psychological damage. Cayetana Salao, of Taller de Comunicacion Mujer, a lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender (LGBT) rights group, told Reuters : “Corrective therapy, in mostly private and clandestine alcohol and drug addiction clinics, continues in Ecuador. It’s a reality.” Conversion therapy continues to be legal in the UK, despite evidence that thousands of people are forced to endure the practice. More: Americas Ecuador Ecuador families Latin America lgbt families South America Queer News. Straight Up. The LGBTQ+ stories you don’t want to miss, delivered to your inbox daily. Email address required Must be valid email Register By registering you agree to our Privacy Policy Thanks for registering! You can update your email subscriptions at any time in the My profile section of your account. Dec 31 2024 Every celebrity who came out as LGBTQ+ in 2024 Related articles Current Affairs Aug 09 2019 Trans woman murdered in Ecuador sparks fears of anti-LGBT violence Current Affairs Feb 12 2018 LGBTQ+ people raped and beaten in ‘gay cure’ rehab clinics in Ecuador Trending Sep 23 2016 First trans couple in Ecuador to have a baby say they want to have more Current Affairs Apr 28 2015 Ecuador just approved same-sex civil unions Community Aug 24 2014 Ecuador: Same-sex unions to be formally recognised from next month Latest News Previous Next Celebrity Sep 25 Trans influencer calls out Nikki Glaser for stand-up joke about what’s ‘in her pants’ Culture Sep 25 Trans pro wrestling trailblazer Gisele Shaw signs exclusive NWA contract Bisexual Sep 25 The Traitors star Freddie Fraser’s mum’s emotional response to his coming out Celebrity Sep 25 Lili Reinhart says Hollywood ‘too afraid’ to greenlight lesbian vampire project Celebrity Sep 25 Carly Rae Jepsen describes moment Heated Rivalry inspired her son’s name Celebrity Sep 25 John Green ‘heartbroken’ for trans Harry Potter fans as he talks JK Rowling Current Affairs Sep 25 JD Vance claims James Talarico has a “weird obsession with children in drag” News Sep 25 Susan Sarandon, Hannah Einbinder and Caleb Hearon detained outside UN after protesting Netanyahu What to buy now Previous Next Fashion Mar 27 Connor Ives and MAC team up to re-release the iconic ‘Protect The Dolls’ t-shirt Music Mar 12 The Pussycat Dolls confirm reunion with new single and tour – how to get tickets Music Jan 23 A full guide to the 2026 Harry Styles Together, Together tour including dates and presale info Shopping Nov 24 2025 Ten truly awesome Christmas gifts you can buy to support queer-owned businesses Trans Sep 09 2025 Lush creates ‘luxurious’ trans flag bath bomb to support trans charities Tickets Jun 25 2025 Dolly Parton announces mini Las Vegas residency after wrapping her last tour almost a decade ago Shopping May 15 2025 LEGO celebrates late gay icon Keith Haring with new art set: ‘Want this so bad’ Music Apr 18 2025 Primavera Sound’s most iconic queer performances, from Troye Sivan to Ethel Cain Exclusive Previous Next Exclusive Sep 11 Ania Magliano talks SNL UK season two and anti-LGBTQ voices in comedy: ‘We do edgy in the right way’ Exclusive Sep 11 Elliot Tuttle on Blue Film’s personal inspiration, rejection and taboo: ‘It’s about loneliness’ Exclusive Sep 09 OF star Andy Lee on love for gay fans, ‘poisonous’ creators and ‘harmful’ stunts: ‘Gay men lift me up every day’ Exclusive Sep 07 Real Housewives of London spill the tea: ‘She’d go to the opening of a packet of crisps’ Opinion Sep 04 Katseye in London: A showcase of real talent deserving of the deafening screams Exclusive Sep 02 Adrian Chiarella and Joe Bird on tackling conversion therapy in gay horror Leviticus Exclusive Aug 21 Sziget Festival drag and circus troupe want audiences to feel like family Exclusive Aug 20 Gay wrestler Anthony Bowens says Heated Rivalry shows authentic life of closeted athletes Register to save articles and more. It'll only take a minute and it's free. JOIN US TODAY! Already have an account? Log in here "/> Download the PinkNews app Award winning LGBTQ+ journalism About us Editorial Policy Contact us Advertise Work for us Terms and conditions Privacy policy Privacy manager Privacy Manager