Slovenia | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Slovenia At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? Yes Legal Gender Recognition Possible? Yes LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? Yes Last Update: March 12, 2026 Slovenia is regarded as one of the most progressive countries in Central and Eastern Europe on LGBTIQ people’s human rights. Since 2016, Slovenia has enacted comprehensive antidiscrimination laws that explicitly prohibit discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, gender identity, and gender expression in public and private life under the Protection Against Discrimination Act . An independent institution—the Advocate of the Principle of Equality —was established under this law to address discrimination and advise on compliance with equality obligations. It was the first post-Communist country to legalize same-sex marriage , following a 2022 Constitutional Court ruling that found the ban on such marriages and joint adoption unconstitutional and mandated legislative alignment. Parliament amended the Family Code accordingly, and equal marriage and adoption rights became fully effective in January 2023. Although legal gender recognition is possible, the current process lacks a clear, modern legal framework and still requires a psychiatric diagnosis, which creates barriers to access and is criticized by international monitoring bodies as overly medicalized and opaque. There is minimal publicly available information on intersex people in Slovenia, but institutional attention to intersex issues is emerging. In 2022, the Advocate of the Principle of Equality reported to the National Assembly on the medicalization and pathologization of intersex individuals and provided recommendations on protecting bodily autonomy and physical integrity, reflecting growing awareness of intersex human-rights concerns. Public opinion in Slovenia on LGBTIQ issues is mixed but fairly supportive in many areas. According to a 2023 Eurobarometer survey, a majority of Slovenians agreed that “there is nothing wrong in a sexual relationship between two persons of the same sex,” and nearly two-thirds agreed that same-sex marriage should be allowed, though support for full equal legal rights, including adoption, was somewhat lower. Despite these legal protections and levels of support, many LGBTIQ people report experiences of discrimination. EU surveys indicate that a significant share of respondents in Slovenia feel discriminated against in daily life situations, and a 2025 Council of Europe report showed that around 29 percent of LGBTIQ people experienced discrimination in the previous year. In 2023, violent attacks occurred during Pride events, including harassment, insults, and physical confrontations with counter-protesters. Local media and rights groups documented hostile incidents during Ljubljana Pride and other gatherings. Political leaders, including the president and prime minister, publicly condemned the violence and reaffirmed commitments to human rights and freedom of expression, and have taken steps to protect the fundamental rights of all citizens. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International