Monaco - Rainbow Map Rainbow Map View By Category View By Country Compare About Rainbow Map View By Category View By Country Compare About Archive Be part of change Contact us ILGA-Europe website Privacy Policy Share Facebook Instagram Youtube Vimeo LinkedIn TikTok Bluesky Monaco open Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kosovo* Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Categories scores Criteria compliance ratio Category & criteria table Annual Review Country score evolution Monaco 2026 Data DOWNLOAD FULL MAP CSV DOWNLOAD MAP PDF DOWNLOAD INDEX PDF Download assets Download Chart PNG JPG PDF SVG Maps and charts are limited to 10 downloads per min/user. Categories Score The full bar chart stands for 100%, and is filled by the country category score. The colour display uses the traffic light palette, with Green representing a score closer to 100% and Red a score closer to 0%. Download assets Download Chart PNG JPG PDF SVG Maps and charts are limited to 10 downloads per min/user. close ASYLUM This category looks into laws that expressly include SOGISC as a qualification criteria for seeking asylum. We also take into account other legislation, policies, instruction or positive measures by state actors that are related to asylum addressing the needs and rights of LGBTI asylum seekers and refugees. Civil Society Space This category is about laws, policies and practices that allow for full exercise of freedom of assembly, association and expression for LGBTI people. Intersex Bodily Integrity The criteria under this category covers prohibition of any kind of surgical or medical intervention on an intersex minor before child is able to give informed consent. We additionally take into account if this prohibition is universal to all persons, establishes a monitoring mechanism and provides access to justice for victims and reparations. Legal Gender Recognition The category looks at laws and policies that ensure legal gender recognition for trans, non-binary and intersex people and the requirements and preconditions to access these procedures. Hate Crime & Hate Speech We look into laws that include sexual orientation, gender identity and sex characteristics in the hate crime and hate speech legislation as an aggravating factor. The category also takes into account the recurrent and continuing policies tackling hatred. Equality & Non Discrimination This category looks into effective anti-discrimination legislation that explicitly includes sexual orientation, gender identity, gender expression and sex characteristics. We also take into consideration laws and policies banning conversion practices and allowing LGBTI people to donate blood. In addition to legislation, we look into effectively working equality bodies and well-implemented action plans. Family This category looks into recognition and protection of LGBTI people’s family rights with consideration of laws on marriage equality, registered partnership, adoption, medically assisted insemination, and trans parenthood. Criteria Compliance Ratio Each pie charts stands for a category and is divided in slices by criteria. When a country complies with a criteria – fully or in some regions – the slice is coloured. Keep in mind the criteria have different weighting factor within a category; for example, the criteria Prohibition of medical intervention without informed consent (intersex) stands for half (2.5%) of the INTERSEX BODILY INTEGRITY category weighting factor (5%). Meaning that even if a country can only comply with this specific criteria within the category (1/4 total criteria) the category scores 50%. More information on the categories and criteria weighting factors here . Download assets Download Chart PNG JPG PDF SVG Maps and charts are limited to 10 downloads per min/user. Category & Criteria Table The table lists detailed information and insights on legislation supporting each criterion status. Please use the filters for in-depth analysis. n/a = not applicable, meaning the criteria didn’t exist in the previous Rainbow Map edition (PROGRESSION column) Complies Applicable in some regions only Does not Comply DOWNLOAD COUNTRY CSV Category open Criteria open Status open Complies Applicable in some regions only Does not Comply Change since 2025 open Compliance increase Compliance decrease No change Not applicable Category Criteria Status Change since 2025 Name of Law / Documents / Institution Date of Adoption Date of Coming into Effect Specific Article of Reference Link Additional Information DOWNLOAD COUNTRY CSV RECOMMENDATIONS In order to improve the legal and policy situation of LGBTI people in Monaco, ILGA-Europe recommend: Marriage equality for same-sex couples Automatic co-parent recognition available for all couples Medically assisted insemination available for all couples Annual Review of Monaco In our Annual Review of the Human Rights Situation of LGBTI People in Europe and Central Asia, we examine the advances made and provide concrete examples of on-the-ground situations at national level country-by-country in the 12 months from January to December 2025. Read our Annual Review of Monaco below for more details and stories behind the Rainbow Map. You can also download the Annual Review chapter (.pdf) covering Monaco. FAMILY Toggle Accordion In October, National Council member Béatrice Fresko-Rolfo called for reforms to address legal inequalities affecting same-sex families in Monaco. Speaking as President of the Commission for Women’s Rights, Family and Equality, she emphasised that “children’s rights must be protected in all circumstances; this principle is neither negotiable nor conditional.” Fresko-Rolfo denounced the existing “legal loophole” that leaves non-biological parents in same-sex families without recognition, urging legislative action in the name of equality and child welfare. FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION Toggle Accordion In April, Mon’Arc En Ciel Monaco became the principality’s first LGBTI association. Its mission is to increase visibility for the local LGBTI community, combat social isolation, and foster dialogue on rights and inclusion. The full Annual Review for 2026 is available here . Country Score Evolution Year Download assets Download Chart PNG JPG PDF SVG Maps and charts are limited to 10 downloads per min/user. Subscribe to ILGA-Europe's newsletter Stay close Co-funded by the European Union. Views and opinions expressed are however those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union or of the granting authority. Neither the European Union nor the granting authority can be held responsible for them. Facebook Instagram Youtube Vimeo LinkedIn TikTok Bluesky Copyright 2026 Rainbow Map Privacy Policy Previous editions Be part of change Powered by SOLOS Agency