United Arab Emirates | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview United Arab Emirates At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? No Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? No Legal Gender Recognition Possible? No LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? No Last Update: March 12, 2026 In the United Arab Emirates, a new federal criminal code enacted in early 2022 criminalized consensual same-sex relations with up to six months in prison. Article 409 of the same law applies to sex between unmarried different-sex partners. Charges can only be filed on the basis of a complaint by a spouse or guardian. While Article 7 of the United Arab Emirates’ constitution officially adopts Shariah as “a main source of legislation,” Shariah penalties do not appear to apply to same-sex relationships, which are among the categories of offenses that are only regulated by the criminal code. Diverse gender expressions are criminalized, with Article 412 of the criminal code penalizing “any man who disguises himself as a woman to enter a woman-only space.” This provision, which was also in the 1987 version of the criminal code, has been used by authorities to prosecute trans women and gender nonconforming people. State laws in several states further criminalize same-sex intimacy and gender nonconformity. The United Arab Emirates has, in several instances, banned media content that positively portrays same-sex relationships. Article 35(4) of the 2012 Law on Combating Cybercrimes prohibited the condoning, provoking, or promoting of sin through any means of information technology. This law was replaced by the 2021 Law on Countering Rumors and Cybercrimes, which retained a similar provision as Article 37(4). Education professionals are forbidden from “discussing gender identity, homosexuality, or any other behavior deemed unacceptable to the UAE’s society.” Article 317 of the criminal code imposes five to ten years of imprisonment for establishing, organizing, or administering any association whose purpose runs contrary to the teachings of Islam. No formal LGBTIQ advocacy organizations are known to exist openly, as extensive censorship and the restrictive legal and societal context render LGBTIQ advocacy nearly impossible. This hostile environment also forces sexual and gender minorities to keep their identities private, and online self-censorship is common . In 2025, Armenian trans activist Lilit Martirosyan was detained and subjected to prolonged questioning and denial of services during a layover at Dubai International Airport, reportedly told she could not enter because of her gender identity despite only being in transit, highlighting how discrimination based on gender identity can manifest in immigration and travel settings. At the same time, openly gay Australian world champion surfer Tyler Wright announced she would compete in an Abu Dhabi event only after receiving assurances from organizers that she would be in a “safe environment,” underscoring that people of queer experience, including visitors and athletes, must seek special guarantees to avoid risk. Ordinary citizens and residents, including migrant workers, benefit from no such guarantees and face a constant threat of arrest. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International