Cameroon jails transgender women for 'attempted homosexuality' Skip to content British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Home News US & Canada UK UK Politics England N. Ireland N. Ireland Politics Scotland Scotland Politics Wales Wales Politics Africa Asia China India Australia Europe Latin America Middle East In Pictures BBC InDepth BBC Verify Sport Business World of Business Technology of Business NYSE Opening Bell Technology Artificial Intelligence Intelligence Revolution AI v the Mind Tech Now Health Culture Film & TV Music Art & Design Style Books Entertainment News Arts Arts in Motion Travel Destinations Africa Antarctica Asia Australia and Pacific Caribbean & Bermuda Central America Europe Middle East North America South America World’s Table Culture & Experiences Adventures The SpeciaList To the Ends of the Earth Earth Science Natural Wonders Climate Solutions Sustainable Business Green Living Audio Podcast Categories Radio Audio FAQs Video BBC Maestro Discover the World Live Live News Live Sport Site search Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather Newsletters Cameroon jails transgender women for 'attempted homosexuality' 12 May 2021 Share Save Add as preferred on Google Reuters Shakiro has thousands of followers on Facebook and YouTube where she is open about her sexuality Two transgender women in Cameroon have been sentenced to five years in jail for contravening homosexuality laws. Their lawyers say they were found guilty of "attempting homosexuality" as well as outraging public decency and problems with their ID cards. One of them is trans celebrity Shakiro, a YouTuber who highlights the problems Cameroon's banned LGBT community faces. She and her friend Patricia have been in detention since February after their arrest at a restaurant. Cameroon is among 31 African countries that criminalises gay sex. BBC Africa Live: Updates from the continent Where it's illegal to be gay The mother no longer ashamed of her gay son Daughters of gay couple denied entry to Namibia "It's a hammer blow. It's the maximum term outlined in the law. The message is clear: homosexuals don't have a place in Cameroon," one of their lawyers, Alice Nkom, who heads the Association for the Defence of Rights of Homosexuals, told the AFP news agency. Their other lawyer, Richard Tamfu, says the pair will appeal against the verdict as there is no proof that homosexual acts were committed, just suspicion. 'Courageous' The court in the city of Douala also fined Shakira and Patricia 200,000 CFA francs ($370; £260) each. If the two are unable to raise the money to pay the penalties, they will face another 12 months in prison on top of their five-year sentence, the BBC's Killian Ngala reports from the capital, Yaoundé. Reuters Some feel that Shakiro has been deliberately targeted because of her celebrity In 2016 Cameroon strengthened its anti-homosexuality laws, changing the penal code to explicitly outlaw same-sex sexual relations, our reporter says. There is animosity towards gay and transgender people in Cameroon and they can often be beaten up in public, he says. Shakiro, who has also been identified as Loïc Njeukam, is unusual for being vocal about such persecution. She has thousands of followers on Facebook and YouTube where she promotes cosmetics and talks openly about her sexuality. The trial of Shakiro and Patricia, who has also been identified as Roland Mouthe, has been high-profile, with critics saying it is a political decision to prosecute them. Most horrific stories of LGBT abuse By Ben Hunte, BBC News Lawyers for Shakiro and Patricia have told me that that the trans women continue to struggle in prison. Patricia says that she is threatened every day and she is scared for her life. I've been reporting on LGBT lives across the world for the past few years, and the experiences of LGBT people in Cameroon are consistently some of the most horrific stories I hear. In February alone, there were three brutal murders of LGBT Cameroonians, and at least 27 arrests. I've heard from people who have attempted suicide, because of being blackmailed and "outed" as their sexuality or gender identity. In almost all of the cases, there are family issues at the centre, and a real sense of shame around being associated with LGBT people. All human rights organisations associated with the arrests of Shakiro and Patricia believe that Cameroon's laws have been abused. Especially because, they say, the charge of "attempted homosexuality" does not apply in this case, as the two trans women were not caught in any sexual situation - they were just having dinner. You may also be interested in: Members of Ghana’s LGBT community speak out about the discrimination they face Where it's illegal to be gay The mother no longer ashamed of her gay son A quick guide to Cameroon Human rights LGBT rights in Africa Cameroon LGBT Transgender people Related Juvenile murder sentence rule doesn't breach human rights, says Supreme Court Workers came across human remains – and unearthed a mass grave of 572 people UN experts say grounds to believe US committed war crimes in Iran strikes More from the BBC 9 hrs ago Theft of church Pride banner reported as hate crime The vicar of St Mark's Church in Sheffield says it is not the first time such items have been taken. 9 hrs ago 1 day ago Rainbow flag wrapped around castle for Pride event Totnes Castle is wrapped in a rainbow flag as part of the Devon town's Pride celebrations. 1 day ago 1 day ago Senedd presiding officer accuses Reform MS of offensive comments in Welsh Gender Service debate Joe Martin called for "butcher" doctors who performed surgery on children to be jailed. 1 day ago 2 days ago 'More will turn up' - Work by Scottish artists unearthed for homecoming exhibition Robert Colquhoun and Robert MacBryde were among the most celebrated figures in British art. 2 days ago 2 days ago Sandie Peggie's views had 'no bearing' on refusing legal support, union says The RCN says its decision not to give Sandie Peggie legal advice had nothing to do with her gender critical views. 2 days ago British Broadcasting Corporation Home News Sport Business Technology Health Culture Arts Travel Earth Audio Video Live Weather BBC Shop BritBox BBC in other languages The BBC is in multiple languages Read the BBC In your own language BBC News Brasil BBC News Mundo (Spanish) BBC News မြန်မာ (Burmese) BBC News 中文 (Chinese) BBC News Indonesia BBC News 코리아 (Korean) BBC News ไทย (Thai) BBC News Tiếng Việt (Vietnamese) BBC News Azərbaycanca (Azeri) BBC News Magyarul (Hungarian) BBC News Кыргыз Кызматы (Kyrgyz) BBC News Polska (Polish) BBC News România (Romanian) BBC News Русская служба (Russian) BBC News na srpskom (Serbian) BBC News Україна (Ukrainian) BBC News O'zbek (Uzbek) BBC News عربي (Arabic) BBC News فارسی (Persian) BBC News Türkçe (Turkish) BBC News বাংলা (Bengali) BBC News دری (Dari) BBC News ગુજરાતી (Gujarati) BBC News हिन्दी (Hindi) BBC News मराठी (Marathi) BBC News नेपाली (Nepali) BBC News සිංහල (Sinhala) BBC News ਪੰਜਾਬੀ (Punjabi) BBC News Afaan Oromoo BBC News አማርኛ (Amharic) BBC News Afrique (French) BBC News Hausa BBC News Gaelic NAIDHEACHDAN BBC News Ìgbò BBC News Japanese 日本語 BBC News Gahuza BBC News Pidgin BBC News Somali BBC News Swahili BBC News தமிழ் (Tamil) BBC News తెలుగు (Telugu) BBC News ትግርኛ (Tigrinya) BBC News اردو (Urdu) BBC News Yorùbá BBC News World Service Follow BBC on: Terms of Use About the BBC Privacy Policy Cookies Do not share or sell my info Accessibility Help Contact the BBC Advertise with us BBC.com Help & FAQs Content Index Set Preferred Source Copyright 2026 BBC. All rights reserved. The BBC is not responsible for the content of external sites. Read about our approach to external linking.