Call us by our names: Trans Filipinos demand legal gender recognition Open navigation MovePH RAPPLER Close menu Latest news Video Communities Philippines Investigative Inside Track Fact Check People Voices Business Technology and Platforms Environment Weather Science World BrandRap Special coverages Rappler+ Exclusives Subscribe to Newsletters RappLearn MovePH Movements & Partners Bulletin Board Topics Rai chatbot About Rappler SEE ALL VIDEOS Watch NOW | Live Top 5 News Today Top 5 News This Week Rappler Recap Rappler Talk Rappler Live Jam Documentaries Video explainers In The Public Square Hold The Line Hindi Ito Marites World View Order In The Court The Explainer Sex and Sensibilities Be The Good Homestretch Rappler Presents HIPE Stories The Green Report SEE ALL PHILIPPINES Philippine News Metro Manila Luzon Visayas Mindanao Overseas Filipinos SEE ALL INVESTIGATIVE Data and Documents Explainers Fast Facts In-depth Podcasts and Videos SEE ALL PEOPLE Actors Artists Athletes Crimes Human Interest Newsmakers Obituary Profiles SEE ALL VOICES Editorials Newsletters Thought Leaders SEE ALL BUSINESS Consumer Issues Corporate Economy & Governance Infrastructure Industries Personal Finance Stocks & Banking SEE ALL ENVIRONMENT Climate Change Disasters in the Philippines Nature Pollution SEE ALL SCIENCE Discoveries & Inventions Earth & Space Life & Health Society & Culture SEE ALL WORLD Africa Asia Pacific Bahasa Indonesia Europe Global Affairs Latin America Middle East South & Central Asia US & Canada SEE ALL BRANDRAP Announcements CheckThisOut Tech and Innovation First Look Rappler Eats Travel and Food Health, Beauty, and Wellness Home and Parenting Lifestyle and Entertainment Rappler Reads Finance and Industries Profiles and Advocacies Data stories SEE ALL SPECIAL COVERAGES SARA DUTERTE IMPEACHMENT PHILIPPINE ELECTIONS Flood Control in the Philippines Exclusive Content Exclusive Events Be a Member #FactsFirst PH #CourageON: No Lockdown on Rights #Atin Ang Pilipinas #Make Manila Liveable ABKD Network Amateur Media Association of Philippine Scouts Baguio Chronicle Break the Fake DAKILA Foundation for Media Alternatives (FMA) Kalikasan Legal Network for Truthful Elections. Mountain Beacon Now You Know PH Pitik Bulag Youth Force Philippines (YFPH) Advisories Campus Bulletin Board Contests and Awards Events Exam results Government job openings Scholarships Trainings and Workshops Topic Directory Trending Asian Games Mary Jane Veloso Media and journalism issues US-Israel war on Iran Donald Trump social media platforms overseas Filipinos Israel-Palestine conflict education in the Philippines Philippine sports Filipino athletes United States Iran SEE ALL OF ABOUT RAPPLER Team Policies Awards and recognition Special Projects News & updates Guest Register Sign in Support Search RAPPLER Support Login Rappler+ MovePH LGBTQ+ community Call us by our names: Trans Filipinos demand legal gender recognition Jul 4, 2025 7:52 AM PHT Joan Alindogan Listen to this article Upgrade to listen Powered by Speechify Already have Rappler+? Sign in to listen to groundbreaking journalism. GENDER. Launching of the Simplified Legal Gender Recognition with transgender community, advocates, and allies, on June 30, 2025. Joan Alindogan/Rappler INFO Several organizations are pushing for a bill that affirms trans rights as human rights and ensures legal recognition of their true identities AT A GLANCE The LGBTQ+ community in the Philippines is advocating for the Simplified Legal Gender Recognition Bill, which aims to legally recognize individuals' self-determined gender identities. The bill, introduced by various transgender rights organizations, will allow Filipinos, including minors with consent, to change their name and gender marker, addressing issues of social exclusion and discrimination faced by transgender individuals. The push for this bill comes in response to ongoing violence against the transgender community, highlighting the urgent need for legal protections to ensure their safety and dignity. This is AI-generated. Read the article for full context. Report any errors . MANILA, Philippines – The LGBTQ+ community has long pushed for laws that protect their right to life and dignity. Now, another critical measure is being eyed after several organizations advocating for transgender rights drafted a bill that gives legal recognition to people’s self-determined gender identity. Society of Trans Women of the Philippines (STRAP), Transmasculine Philippines, Pioneer Filipino Transgender men Movement (Pioneer FTM), and Relentlessly Chase introduced the Simplified Legal Gender Recognition Bill in a press conference on June 30, at the UP Diliman Center for Women’s and Gender Studies. According to Vashti Ortego, executive director of STRAP and lead drafter of the bill, the measure seeks to establish clear and faster judicial and administrative procedures allowing transgender people “to legally change their name and gender marker based on a self-determined gender identity.” THE LEAD DRAFTER. Vashti Ortego of STRAP shares their journey in drafting the Legal Gender Recognition Bill for the trans community. Photo by Joan Alindogan. The bill will allow Filipinos, including minors with consent, to apply for legal gender recognition and choose a gender marker other than male or female, such as X or nonbinary. “The lack of a clear, accessible process to recognize the gender of trans people leads to social exclusion, invasion of privacy, discrimination, and violence,” said Chase Go of Relentlessly Chase, the bill’s first drafter. The bill was shaped by years of studying global gender recognition practices, consulting with LGBTQ+ friendly countries like Thailand, and listening to the real-life experiences of the trans community For many, the passage of the bill is not just paperwork; it is key to survival, especially in the Philippines, where the lack of protection leaves them vulnerable to violence and harassment. This year alone, a series of killings of transpinays have shaken the community, with the Commission on Human Rights (CHR) calling it a “disturbing pattern of transfemicide.” During Pride Month, human rights advocate Ali Macalintal was shot in an acupuncture clinic, while 18-year-old student Kierra Apostol was found lifeless in a river days after going missing. Earlier this year, beauty salon owner Ren Tampus was also gunned down. These killings and continued delays in passing anti-discrimination bills have strengthened calls to advance the Simplified Legal Gender Recognition Bill in Congress. Why the Simplified Legal Gender Recognition Bill matters Beyond safety, the bill also addresses the everyday struggles the trans community encounters. Chase, founder of Transman Equality and Awareness Movement, helps educate the community on the costly and difficult process of changing their names. But without a law to change gender markers, their safety, dignity, and opportunities remain at risk. Janlee Dungca, managing directress of Castro PR, recalled being denied a job despite her qualifications because the institution wasn’t ready to hire a trans woman. Miss Trans Philippines 1st runner-up Mardy Mabalda faced a similar rejection: “I was told to cut my hair and wear male attire to proceed with my application.” TESTIMONIES OF TRANSPINAYS. Janlee Dungca (left) and Mardy Mabalda (right) share their lived realities under legal invisibility. Photo by Joan Alindogan. Both also shared difficult experiences with immigration. Janlee was detained twice at immigration due to mismatched documents, an experience common to many trans travelers. Janlee later learned they were detained because their appearance didn’t match the gender marker or photo on their IDs, and they lacked documents to prove their identity — a reality Mardy confirmed. “I had a friend who was denied entry to another country just because the gender marker on her passport didn’t match how she looked,” Mardy also shared. ID mismatches are common for trans people, often leading to suspicion or denial of basic services beyond immigration. “As a trans person, all of these aspects of my identity are being questioned, and it’s painful because you worked hard to become a professional and to succeed in life,” Arjhay Puod, advocacy officer of Pioneer FTM, shared in a mix of Filipino and English. But discrimination isn’t the whole story; there is also trans joy. Mikee Inton-Campbell, former STRAP board member, shared that when she applied for a driver’s license in California, a clerk who was a trans ally handed her an additional form to change her legal name and gender. “She gave me a legal name change and gender change form without even prompting,” Mikee said. “I didn’t ask for it; it was just given to me , ” she added in Filipino. Mikee hopes for the same openness she experienced in California to be reflected in the Philippines, where such rights are still denied. Next steps for Simplified Legal Gender Recognition Bill There was once hesitation within the trans community to prioritize the bill. “The focus was first on passing anti-discrimination bills and ordinances because pushing the LGR bill might derail the various anti-discrimination measures proposed by our community,” said Arjhay in a mix of English and Filipino. During Rappler’s Be The Good episode with Bataan 1st District Representative Geraldine Roman and Akbayan Representative Percival Cendaña, Roman echoed the same sentiment. “I’m afraid that my colleagues in Congress might have too much to handle. The anti-discrimination bill, the SOGIESC Equality Bill, might be overshadowed,” she said in a mix of Filipino and English, responding to criticisms over her inability to pass such a law as the first trans woman in Congress. As the community prepares to endorse the bill to their allies in the 20th Congress on July 28, allies voiced their support. In a speech, Fayda M. Dumarpa of the CHR pledged support for the measure, while Gabriela Women’s Party vice chairperson Sarah Elago committed to formally receiving the bill and building support within Congress. Although support is strong, advocates are also preparing for backlash. “We want to assume what could be the possible arguments against the proposed bill and what could be the community’s counter-argument,” Rocky Rinabor of Pioneer FTM said during a roundtable discussion. To do this, they planned a community review where each provision will be scrutinized, discussed, and refined based on feedback from the LGBTQ+ community and legal experts. They also emphasized the need to build coalitions with labor rights groups, not just with women and the LGBTQ+ community, drawing on shared struggles in demanding basic human rights. – Rappler.com Add to Preferred Sources Share in Chat Share article Facebook X (Twitter) Copy Link Copied How does this make you feel? Loading Related Topics gender gender equality LGBTQ+ LGBTQ+ rights SOGIE author Joan Alindogan Joan Alindogan is a community and civic engagement specialist at MovePH, Rappler’s civic engagement arm. More from Joan Alindogan Recommended Stories {{ item.sitename }} {{ item.primarytopic }} {{ item.primarytopic }} {{ item.title }} gender Thought Leaders [Dash of SAS] The opportunistic gender politics of Pia Cayetano Share in Chat Share article Facebook X (Twitter) Copy Link Copied Rappler IQ FAST FACTS: PMA Talang Dangal Class of 2026 Share in Chat Share article Facebook X (Twitter) Copy Link Copied BrandRap Growth, grit, and impact: Women who lead with purpose at the Jollibee Group Share in Chat Share article Facebook X (Twitter) Copy Link Copied Athletes Transgender athletes barred from female category events in Olympics Share in Chat Share article Facebook X (Twitter) Copy Link Copied Culture Desk Sex and Sensibilities: Is Bad Bunny the antidote to toxic masculinity? Share in Chat Share article Facebook X (Twitter) Copy Link Copied More on gender gender equality Obituary Feminist activist Gloria Steinem dies at age 92 Share in Chat Share article Facebook X (Twitter) Copy Link Copied Artists She Talks Asia finds place ‘rich in stories’ in first Cebu summit Share in Chat Share article Facebook X (Twitter) Copy Link Copied Celebrities Julianne Moore warns gender equality still distant at Cannes event Share in Chat Share article Facebook X (Twitter) Copy Link Copied Rappler IQ FAST FACTS: PMA Talang Dangal Class of 2026 Share in Chat Share article Facebook X (Twitter) Copy Link Copied BrandRap Growth, grit, and impact: Women who lead with purpose at the Jollibee Group Share in Chat Share article Facebook X (Twitter) Copy Link Copied More on gender equality LGBTQ+ Artists Ilokano filmmaker spotlights real-life queer choir stories Share in Chat Share article Facebook X (Twitter) Copy Link Copied Metro Manila Parents join UP Pride March to support queer youth Share in Chat Share article Facebook X (Twitter) Copy Link Copied Human Interest Longed for and lived for: A same-sex couple on fatherhood against all odds Share in Chat Share article Facebook X (Twitter) Copy Link Copied Human Interest Content creators Caz and Pepper change the game for sapphics who love nightlife Share in Chat Share article Facebook X (Twitter) Copy Link Copied Human Interest Why the return of White Party Manila matters to LGBTQ+ community Share in Chat Share article Facebook X (Twitter) Copy Link Copied More on LGBTQ+ LGBTQ+ rights Newsletters [DECODED] Tacloban shooting and the lies that undermine protective measures Share in Chat Share article Facebook X (Twitter) Copy Link Copied Metro Manila Parents join UP Pride March to support queer youth Share in Chat Share article Facebook X (Twitter) Copy Link Copied Human Interest Longed for and lived for: A same-sex couple on fatherhood against all odds Share in Chat Share article Facebook X (Twitter) Copy Link Copied Human Interest Content creators Caz and Pepper change the game for sapphics who love nightlife Share in Chat Share article Facebook X (Twitter) Copy Link Copied People ‘HOOK UP: The Musical’ brings out the ‘human’ in the discourse on sex Share in Chat Share article Facebook X (Twitter) Copy Link Copied More on LGBTQ+ rights SOGIE Newsletters [DECODED] Tacloban shooting and the lies that undermine protective measures Share in Chat Share article Facebook X (Twitter) Copy Link Copied Visayas Cebu gives LGBTQ+ right to make healthcare decisions for partners Share in Chat Share article Facebook X (Twitter) Copy Link Copied People Drag in Sinulog: How queer voices found space in the Philippines’ largest Catholic festival Share in Chat Share article Facebook X (Twitter) Copy Link Copied BrandRap Nestlé Philippines marches with Pride, supports Love Laban 2025 Share in Chat Share article Facebook X (Twitter) Copy Link Copied More on SOGIE RAPPLER follow us Facebook Twitter Instagram YouTube LinkedIn Viber Join Rappler+ Know more here Crowdfunding Subscribe to Newsletters Founding board Rappler board of directors About Us Mission Statement Editorial standards and guidelines AI GUIDELINES The Team Topics directory Rai chatbot Contact Us Privacy Statement Terms of Use Community Guidelines NPC Registration NPC Privacy Seal Philippine elections Content Use Policy Close Pick up right where you left off. Switch to the Rappler app for a smoother, faster reading experience. Open App No Rappler app yet? Get it here. Continue on browser Logged in as Toggle account details My account Log out Checking your Rappler+ subscription... Upgrade to Rappler+ for exclusive content and unlimited access. Why is it important to subscribe? Learn more You are subscribed to Rappler+ Join Rappler+ Support Support Previous> Share in Chat Share article Facebook X (Twitter) Copy Link Copied Next> Close video Share in Chat Share article Facebook X (Twitter) Copy Link Copied READ