Eswatini government refuses to register LGBTI group - MambaOnline - LGBTQ South Africa online Skip to content Southern Africa's longest-running LGBTQ+ News and Community Platform Home News Culture & Events Health & Well-Being Community Project Transcend Resources & Advice Relationships Sexuality Health Identity Organisations About Our Story Advertise With Us Newsletter Editorial Code Contact Foundation Donate Home News Culture & Events Health & Well-Being Community Project Transcend Resources & Advice Relationships Sexuality Health Identity Organisations About Our Story Advertise With Us Newsletter Editorial Code Contact Foundation Donate Search Donate SIGN UP Home News Culture & Events Health & Well-Being Community Project Transcend Resources & Advice Relationships Sexuality Health Identity Organisations About Our Story Advertise With Us Newsletter Editorial Code Contact Foundation Donate Home News Culture & Events Health & Well-Being Community Project Transcend Resources & Advice Relationships Sexuality Health Identity Organisations About Our Story Advertise With Us Newsletter Editorial Code Contact Foundation Donate Eswatini government refuses to register LGBTI group Luiz De Barros Jul 6, 2019 HEADLINES Melusi Simelane, founder of Eswatini Sexual and Gender Minorities The registrar of companies in Eswatini (formerly Swaziland) is refusing to register an LGBTI rights group, arguing that its objectives have a “negative mindset.” In May, founder Melusi Simelane applied to have Eswatini Sexual and Gender Minorities (ESGM) formally registered, which if successful would make it the first fully-LGBTI rights group to be recognised in the country. While other registered groups in Eswatini do campaign for LGBTI equality, they have had to include more “acceptable” aims, such as providing health or HIV-related services, in their objectives in order to be registered. Simelane, however, believes it is important that ESGM is upfront and unflinching in its objectives. In its application, ESGM’s very first objective is: “To advance protection of the rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) in Eswatini and reduce harm that affect their wellbeing based upon sexual orientation and gender identity.” Yet, while most companies are registered in days, Simelane has been given the runaround for weeks by the Registrar of Companies, Msebe Malinga. In a meeting with Simelane on 14 June, Malinga reportedly told the activist that the organisation’s objects were unacceptable “on the grounds of morality.” He allegedly insisted that in order to not offend the public the objectives had to be changed and that ESGM should rather be registered as a health organisation. The right to associate and form an organisation Simelane claims that Malinga could not explain which laws ESGM’s objectives would break. “Malinga seems to be missing the issue of equality before the law, as assured in the bill of rights,” Simelane told MambaOnline. Simelane refused to make any changes to the application, after which Malinga responded that he would need to consult with his superiors and the attorney general. Speaking to the Times of Swaziland, the registrar confirmed that he was concerned about “the sensitivity” of the words used in the group’s objectives which could be seen to have “a negative mindset to the public,” and that they had to be reviewed. In a follow-up letter to Malinga, Simelane’s lawyer noted he had committed to reverting by 20 June with a response. The lawyer said that if the matter was not amicably resolved by then, “we will have no option but to seek relief from the High Court.” Simelane has still not received a response and says that the registrar is now not responding to his written and telephonic communication. He is considering his next step, which could include legal action. “We are continuing to have faith in the system, and we will continue trying to reach out to the registrar, until a time where we see that the registrar is clearly failing on his duties,” said a frustrated Simelane. “Which is when we can indeed seek relief from the High Court.” Simelane believes that the matter is quite simply about “the importance of equality before the law, which is all we are asking; the right to associate, and form an organisation.” Swaziland is one of the world’s last remaining absolute monarchies and has been consistently criticised for its poor human rights record. While arrests and prosecutions are rare, LGBTI people face widespread societal and legal discrimination. Last month, activists successfully held the second eSwatini Pride in the capital Mbabane, which saw around 200 people marching for LGBTI equality and acceptance. Leave a Comment Cancel reply Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked * Comment * Name * Email * Website Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment. Δ Trending Articles Thami Dish Is Married! Meet His Husband Dr Wesley Willis and Read Their Love Story Cape Town Rainbow Crosswalk Vandalism Unleashes Flood of Anti-LGBTQ+ Hate Man Who Says He Vandalised Cape Town Rainbow Crossing Comes Forward Cape Town’s Rainbow Crossing Vandalised – Twice! ‘I’m Surprised I Woke Up’: Gay Man Attacked with Broken Bottle in Pretoria West Your subscription could not be saved. Please try again. Your subscription has been successful. Mamba Wrap Newsletter Our FREE weekly newsletter that keeps you updated on the latest LGBTQ+ news and views - delivered straight to your inbox! Enter your email address to subscribe Provide your email address to subscribe. For e.g abc@xyz.com SUBSCRIBE Facebook X-twitter Instagram Youtube Threads Tiktok Linkedin Whatsapp Sign Up Privacy Policy RSS Feeds Sign Up Privacy Policy RSS Feeds Copyright © 2026 MambaOnline Facebook X-twitter Instagram Youtube Threads Tiktok Linkedin Whatsapp We use cookies to ensure that we give you the best experience on our website. If you continue to use this site we will assume that you are happy with it. Ok