British Transport Police amends strip-searching policy after supreme court gender ruling | Rail transport | The Guardian Skip to main content Skip to navigation Close dialogue 1 / 1 Next image Previous image Toggle caption Print subscriptions Search jobs Sign in Eur Europe edition UK edition US edition Australia edition International edition The Guardian - Back to home The Guardian News Opinion Sport Culture Lifestyle Show more Hide expanded menu News View all News World news UK news Climate crisis Ukraine Environment Science Global development Football Tech Business Obituaries Opinion View all Opinion The Guardian view Columnists Cartoons Opinion videos Letters Sport View all Sport Football Cricket Rugby union Tennis Cycling F1 Golf US sports Culture View all Culture Books Music TV & radio Art & design Film Games Classical Stage Lifestyle View all Lifestyle Fashion Food Recipes Love & sex Health & fitness Home & garden Women Men Family Travel Money Search input google-search Search Support us Print subscriptions Search jobs Holidays Digital Archive Guardian Licensing Live events About Us The Guardian app Video Podcasts Pictures Newsletters Today's paper Inside the Guardian Guardian Weekly Crosswords Wordiply Corrections Tips Search input google-search Search Search jobs Holidays Digital Archive Guardian Licensing Live events About Us UK UK politics Education Media Society Law Scotland Wales Northern Ireland The British Transport Police said the decision was an ‘interim position while we digest yesterday’s judgment’. Photograph: Ianni Dimitrov Pictures/Alamy View image in fullscreen The British Transport Police said the decision was an ‘interim position while we digest yesterday’s judgment’. Photograph: Ianni Dimitrov Pictures/Alamy Rail transport This article is more than 1 year old British Transport Police amends strip-searching policy after supreme court gender ruling This article is more than 1 year old Male officers would carry out searches on trans women, BTP says, as it ‘reviews implications of ruling’ Rajeev Syal Home affairs editor Thu 17 Apr 2025 19.06 CEST First published on Thu 17 Apr 2025 18.11 CEST Share Prefer the Guardian on Google Trans women arrested on Britain’s railways will in future be strip-searched by male officers in an updated policy after a landmark ruling by the supreme court . The British Transport Police said same-sex searches in custody would be conducted “in accordance with the biological birth sex of the detainee” under updated guidance for public bodies. Under the force’s previous policy, officers had been told that anyone in custody with a gender recognition certificate would be searched by an officer matching a detainee’s acquired gender. What does the UK supreme court’s ruling on definition of ‘women’ mean? Read more Judges in the UK’s most senior court ruled unanimously on Wednesday that the legal definition of a woman in the Equality Act 2010 did not include transgender women who hold gender recognition certificates. A spokesperson for BTP said: “Under previous policy, we had advised that someone with a gender recognition certificate may be searched in accordance with their acquired sex. “However, as an interim position while we digest yesterday’s judgment, we have advised our officers that any same-sex searches in custody are to be undertaken in accordance with the biological birth sex of the detainee. “We are in the process of reviewing the implications of the ruling and will consider any necessary updates to our policies and practices in line with the law and national guidance.” The update comes during a legal battle between gender-critical campaigners and the force over its guidance that allowed transgender officers to strip-search women. The policy allowed trans women on staff to intimately search women so long as they had a gender recognition certificate. Maya Forstater, the chief executive of the human rights charity Sex Matters, said: “This change of position by British Transport Police is a welcome sign that yesterday’s supreme court judgment will have a huge impact. “Even before the judgment, Sex Matters argued that BTP’s policy was unlawful. It said that male officers with gender recognition certificates – that is, men with paperwork saying they were women – could carry out searches, including strip-searches, on female detainees. And it said that female officers were expected to search male detainees if they identified as women. “This policy was based on the demands of the trans lobby, and completely ignored women’s fundamental human rights. Female officers we interviewed told us about being pressured to carry out searches on men who claimed to be women, and how humiliating and degrading they found that.” A BTP spokesperson confirmed the judicial review was under way, and so could not comment further. A spokesperson for Sex Matters has been approached for comment. After criticism in January, the National Police Chiefs’ Council suspended similar guidance permitting trans women to intimately search women. Updated guidance for public bodies after the supreme court’s ruling is expected to be issued by the summer, the head of the equalities regulator said on Thursday. Kishwer Falkner, the chair of the Equality and Human Rights Commission, d escribed the ruling as “enormously consequential” . She told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme: “We are going to have a new statutory code of practice, statutory meaning it will be the law of the land, it will be interpreted by courts as the law of the land. We’re hoping we’re going to have that by the summer.” She said it would give “clarity” that trans women could not participate in women’s sports or use women-only toilets or changing rooms, and said the NHS must update its guidance on single-sex wards based on biological sex. Asked if the supreme court ruling was “a victory for common sense”, she said: “Only if you recognise that trans people exist, they have rights and their rights must be respected. Then it becomes a victory for common sense. “It’s not a victory for an increase in unpleasant actions against trans people. We will not tolerate that. We stand here to defend trans people as much as we do anyone else. So I want to make that very clear.” Explore more on these topics Rail transport Gender Transgender UK supreme court Women Transport policy Transport news Share Reuse this content More on this story More on this story Lib Dems reject ‘discriminatory and unworkable’ EHRC guidance on transgender people 6d ago High court clears way for clinical trial giving puberty blockers to children 31 Jul 2026 Amnesty UK self-reports to watchdog after calling JK Rowling women’s centre ‘anti-rights’ 16 Jul 2026 Labour MPs doubt EHRC guidance on court’s biological sex ruling is workable 16 Jun 2026 Hampstead Heath ponds to remain trans-inclusive after public back existing rules 4 Jun 2026 One year on: how landmark ruling on single-sex spaces has changed lives 15 Apr 2026 EHRC updates guidance on how to apply supreme court ruling on gender 14 Apr 2026 Girlguiding gives trans girls and women until September to leave UK organisation 24 Mar 2026 NHS England pauses new referrals for masculinising or feminising hormone treatment in under-18s 9 Mar 2026 UK health official recused from puberty blockers trial after bias claims 1 Mar 2026 Most viewed Most viewed UK UK politics Education Media Society Law Scotland Wales Northern Ireland News Opinion Sport Culture Lifestyle Original reporting and incisive analysis, direct from the Guardian every morning Sign up for our email About us Help Complaints & corrections Contact us Tip us off SecureDrop Privacy policy Cookie policy Tax strategy Terms & conditions All topics All writers Newsletters Digital newspaper archive Bluesky Facebook Instagram LinkedIn Threads TikTok YouTube Advertise with us Search UK jobs Tips Accessibility settings Work with us Back to top © 2026 Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved. (dcr)