P.E.I. transgender community applauds ID changes | CBC News Skip to Main Content Accessibility Help Menu Menu Television CBC Gem headphone CBC Listen Search Search Sign In Quick Links News Sports Radio Music Listen Live TV Watch news Top Stories Local Climate World Canada Politics Indigenous Business The National Health Entertainment Science CBC News Investigates Disability Life Go Public About CBC News Being Black in Canada More P.E.I. transgender community applauds ID changes | CBC News Loaded PEI P.E.I. transgender community applauds ID changes Some people in P.E.I.'s transgender community are applauding the MacLauchlan government's move this week to make it easier for Islanders to change their gender on official documents. 'P.E.I. has definitely come a long way ... to be more accepting and supportive of trans people' Sara Fraser · CBC News · Posted: Apr 18, 2016 6:00 AM EDT | Last Updated: April 18, 2016 Play Listen to this article Estimated 3 minutes The audio version of this article is generated by AI-based technology. Mispronunciations can occur. We are working with our partners to continually review and improve the results. Jesse Macmillan says the transgender community is 'very happy' about the government's planned changes. (Submitted by Jesse Macmillan) Social Sharing Some people in P.E.I.'s transgender community are applauding the MacLauchlan government's move this week to make it easier for Islanders to change their gender on official documents. P.E.I. making it easier for transgender people to officially change gender Health PEI will cover costs of 3 surgeries for transgender patients The government tabled a bill to amend the Vital Statistics Act, requiring people only to declare the gender they identify with and have a letter from a doctor. Sex-reassignment surgery will no longer be necessary "I think it's a very good step in the right direction. We're all very happy about it," Jesse Macmillan, a newly-minted member of the board of directors of Pride P.E.I., told CBC News . [P.E.I. is] definitely trying to be more accepting and supportive of trans people. - Jesse Macmillan "It's one of the barriers that was in the way that made it difficult for trans people to really be themselves," Macmillan said, noting that sex-reassignment surgery is very expensive and the closest place to have it done is in Montreal. Not all transgender people even need or want surgery below the belt. Third category Macmillan, a 22-year-old UPEI journalism student who is transitioning from female to male, would like to see the government eventually take the extra step of adding a third gender category for those who don't identify as either male or female. Such people sometimes call themselves gender-fluid, genderqueer or non-binary. Macmillan has quite a few friends in Charlottetown who fall into a third category, he said. Instead of referring to those people as he or she, they prefer the pronoun they. Macmillan uses testosterone therapy and last summer had a double mastectomy, after the province announced it would fund three surgeries for gender reassignment surgery including mastectomies, hysterectomies, and orchiectomies — or testicle removal. Everything went smoothly with the surgery and Macmillan said he was treated well at the Q.E.H. He's looking forward to going shirtless at the beach this summer, and plans to get tattoos to cover any lingering scars. Health PEI does not know how many Islanders have had surgeries for sex-reassignment purposes, as they do not track the reason a patient gets a surgery, officials said. P.E.I. has 'come a long way' "Maybe I'm just lucky, I don't know, but I feel like P.E.I. has definitely come a long way and they're definitely trying to be more accepting and supportive of trans people," Macmillan said, noting his coming-out as trans a few years ago in high school also went surprisingly well. He plans to change his government identification right away — something he's wanted for a while. There have been seven requests in the last two years from people wanting to change their IDs, said officials in Premier Wade MacLauchlan's office, and they anticipate the number will increase with the changes. In December 2013, P.E.I. passed legislation to include "gender identity" and "gender expression" in its Human Rights Act. CBC's Journalistic Standards and Practices · About CBC News Corrections and clarifications · Submit a news tip · Report error Related Stories P.E.I. making it easier for transgender people to officially change gender Health PEI will cover costs of 3 surgeries for transgender patients Footer Links My Account Profile CBC Gem Newsletters About CBC Accounts Connect with CBC Facebook X YouTube Instagram Mobile RSS Podcasts Contact CBC Submit Feedback Help Centre Audience Relations, CBC P.O. Box 500 Station A Toronto, ON Canada, M5W 1E6 Toll-free (Canada only): 1-866-306-4636 About CBC Corporate Info Sitemap Reuse & Permission Terms of Use Privacy Notice Privacy Preferences Jobs Our Unions Independent Producers Political Ads Registry AdChoices Services Ombudsman Corrections and Clarifications Public Appearances Commercial Services CBC Shop Doing Business with Us Renting Facilities Radio Canada International CBC Lite Accessibility It is a priority for CBC to create products that are accessible to all in Canada including people with visual, hearing, motor and cognitive challenges. Closed Captioning and Described Video is available for many CBC shows offered on CBC Gem . About CBC Accessibility Accessibility Feedback © 2026 CBC/Radio-Canada. All rights reserved. Visitez Radio-Canada.ca