Myanmar junta bans 7 books with LGBTQ+ themes – Radio Free Asia Skip to main content Sections Sections Sections 普通话 Opens in new window 粤语 Opens in new window မြန်မာ Opens in new window 한국어 Opens in new window ລາວ Opens in new window ខ្មែរ Opens in new window བོད་སྐད། Opens in new window ئۇيغۇر Opens in new window Tiếng Việt Opens in new window English Opens in new window Search Search Close 普通话 Opens in new window 粤语 Opens in new window မြန်မာ Opens in new window 한국어 Opens in new window ລາວ Opens in new window ខ្មែរ Opens in new window བོད་སྐད། Opens in new window ئۇيغۇر Opens in new window Tiếng Việt Opens in new window English Opens in new window Cambodia China Laos Myanmar North Korea Tibet Uyghur Vietnam Pacific South China Sea Environment Asia Fact Check Lab Cartoon Special report Video Opinion About RFA Show About RFA sub sections Who We Are Press Room Contact Us Jobs and Internships Opens in new window Myanmar junta bans 7 books with LGBTQ+ themes The community has long faced oppression in conservative Myanmar. By RFA Burmese 2025.01.10 Myanmar has banned seven books because of their LGBTQ+ content and will take legal action against their publishers, the military government announced, adding that the books were “obscene” and socially unacceptable. The banned domestically published books are “A Butterfly Rests on My Heart” by Aung Khant, “1500 Miles to You” and “Love Planted by Hate” by Mahura, Myint Mo’s “Tie the Knot of Love”, “Match Made in Clouds” by DiDi Zaw, “DISO+Extra” by Red in Peace and “Concerned Person U Wai” by Vivian, the Ministry of Information said. “These books are not accepted by Myanmar society, they are shameless and the content that can mislead the thinking and feelings of young people,” the Ministry of Information said in a statement published in state-run media on Thursday. LGBTQ+ people face widespread prejudice in socially conservative Myanmar, where British colonial-era legislation criminalises gay sex with up to 10 years in jail. The LGBTQ+ community made some advances during nearly a decade of tentative reforms, when the military partially stepped back from power to let a civilian government led by Aung San Suu Kyi rule, establishing some rights groups and holding festivals. But the democratic experiment ended in February 2021 when the military ousted Suu Kyi’s government and cracked down on dissent, with LBGTQ+ people among those who have been particularly hard hit, U.N. rights investigators have said. The ministry said the publishers of the seven books by Myanmar authors had broken the law by putting out obscene literature without permission and prosecutions would take place. Radio Free Asia tried to contact some of the publishers and authors of the banned books but was not able to. RELATED STORIES Junta censors tighten grip on Myanmar film industry Myanmar’s junta cuts filmmaker’s life sentence to 15 years as part of wider amnesty Myanmar’s junta shuts down publisher for distributing book on Rohingya genocide One reader in the main city of Yangon said he could not understand why the books were banned. While most were about LGBTQ+ people, they were not obscene, he told RFA. “These books can be read for entertainment. I don’t think they’re dirty,” said the reader, who highlighted strong characters in DiDi Zaw’s “Match Made in Clouds.” One Myanmar author, not among those whose books were banned, told RFA that while the expression of sexuality might be considered obscene, there was also the issue of free expression. “It doesn’t mean that obscenity should be allowed but banning books violates freedom of expression,” said the author who declined to be identified for security reasons. One member of the LGBTQ+ community said the military represented oppressive chauvinism. “The army is dominated by chauvinism. So women, children and LGBT people will always be oppressed,” the community member who also declined to be identified told RFA. “Taking action against books published about LGBT people but considered obscene is oppressing us … It makes me think we have to work harder in the revolution against the junta.” The U.N. Human Rights Council said in a report last year that Myanmar’s 2021 coup had precipitated an unprecedented human rights crisis. “Women, girls, and LGBT people are severely and uniquely impacted by this crisis, yet these impacts are all too often obscured and ignored by the international community,” it said. Edited by Mike Firn MORE Myanmar ‘Modern day slavery:’ Myanmar’s military swells ranks through corruption and deceit Exclusive: Kim Aris warns ASEAN against legitimizing Myanmar military government Myanmar removes at least 15 statues of national hero Gen. Aung San nationwide Aung San Suu Kyi transferred to house arrest Award-winning Burmese journalist Shin Daewe released from prison MOST READ RFA 1 . Photos: China’s Xi Jinping receives rare welcome as Trump summit begins 2 . As Xi lands in Washington, Uyghurs and Tibetans press Trump for human rights showdown 3 . Residents say Philippines’ Pax Silica Hub will force them off their ancestral land 4 . Xi Jinping’s US visit will be a test of his power among China’s elite 5 . ‘Modern day slavery:’ Myanmar’s military swells ranks through corruption and deceit