Foreign embassies in Estonia: LGBTI rights are human rights Skip to content About Contact Get Involved Supporters Main Menu Life Business Culture Technology Security Knowledge Opinion People Pictures Videos About Contact Get Involved Supporters Foreign embassies’ common declaration in support of Baltic Pride 2017 By Estonian World / July 7, 2017 / Leave a Comment / Opinion / 2 minutes of reading 510 shares Share 510 Tweet LinkedIn Email A number of foreign embassies and representations in Estonia have issued a declaration in support of Baltic Pride 2017, saying that everybody needs to keep working towards an environment free from discrimination. On the occasion of Baltic Pride 2017, taking place in Tallinn from 6-9 July, we express our support for efforts to enhance the promotion and protection of the human rights of lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex persons and to raise public awareness of the issues affecting the LGBTI communities in the Baltic states. Human rights apply to every human being, regardless of sexual orientation, gender identity or expression. Respect for these basic principles obliges states to protect all citizens from violence and discrimination and to ensure they enjoy equal opportunities. We reaffirm the inherent dignity of each individual as expressed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. For this, we need to keep working together to create an environment of inclusion and equality, free from discrimination where all human rights are fully guaranteed. We pay tribute to the important work of the LGBTI communities in the Baltic states, as well as the work of all those in government and outside who seek to ensure human rights for LGBTI persons and end discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, gender identity or gender expression. LGBTI rights are human rights, which everyone should support and respect. I Embassy of Austria, Embassy of Brazil, British Embassy, Embassy of Canada, Embassy of Czech Republic, Embassy of Denmark, Embassy of Finland, Embassy of France, Embassy of Germany, Embassy of Greece, Embassy of Ireland, Embassy of Italy, Embassy of Latvia, Embassy of Lithuania, Embassy of Netherlands, Embassy of Norway, Embassy of Spain, Embassy of Sweden, Embassy of the United States of America, Estonian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, European Commission Representation, European Parliament Information Office, Nordic Council of Ministers I Cover: Map of Estonia on the rainbow flag (the image is illustrative.) Read also: Chris Glew: Estonia needs to address its false phobias . 510 shares Share 510 Tweet LinkedIn Email About The Author Estonian World Estonian World is a global independent online magazine, founded in London in 2012 and headquartered in Tallinn, Estonia. The magazine has editorial representations in London, Boston, Los Angeles and Tallinn, and contributors all over the world, on every continent. Follow us on Facebook , Twitter , LinkedIn and Instagram . Leave a Comment Cancel Reply Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked * Type here.. Name* Email* Website Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment. Recommended stories Estonia is one of the most homophobic countries in the OECD Podcast: Humour as a protest Liisa Rohumaa: It is time more straight people… Estonia elected to the UN Human Rights Council Joelle Marcelle Antson: Shame silences, pride heals… Enjoying Estonian World stories? SUPPORT Read Estonian World founders appeal and please consider becoming a supporter. Thank you in advance! FOLLOW Facebook Twitter LinkedIn Instagram YouTube WEEKLY NEWSLETTER © 2026 Estonian World | All rights reserved | Terms of use | Privacy Policy Powered by Start typing and press enter to search Search... Support independent Estonian journalism. Read our appeal and become our supporter on Patreon Scroll to Top