Transphobic attack in Istanbul Masthead Kaos GL Kaos GL Magazine Kaos Q TÜRKÇE Home Page human rights women media arts and culture life Rainbow Forum Writers Multimedia Kaos GL Association Kaos GL Magazine Kaos Q TÜRKÇE Masthead Transphobic attack in Istanbul 19/08/2024 | Writer: Kaos GL According to Trans Pride Week, trans woman Yaşam, who was attacked in Bakırköy, was detained and spent the night in a detention center. Trans Pride Week announced that a 17-year-old knife-wielding attacker targeted a trans woman on August 14. According to Trans Pride Week, Yaşam, a trans woman who was attacked in Bakırköy, was detained and spent the night in a detention center. The attacker with a knife was not detained. Pride Week announced on its social media accounts that Yaşam, who was referred to the court with a request for arrest, was released. The full statement is as follows: “In Bakırköy, our trans woman friend Yaşam was subjected to a verbal, physical and knife attack by a 17-year-old male. The perpetrator slandered our trans woman friend by relying on the historical background of the male state and its mechanisms and thinking that he would be exonerated. Our friend was detained last night and spent the night in jail. Life is now free. The detention of the victim trans woman, not the knife attacker, reveals the hate policy of the Turkish state against us trans people. While the perpetrator was detained and released from the police station, Yaşam was referred for arrest. We will do whatever we can to ensure that the male perpetrator gets the necessary punishment and we stand by Yaşam. Never forget that the cishetero patriarchy behind you is fragile, but our trans solidarity is in place! We will not allow you to target trans people. We will deal with all the lying perpetrators. No exculpatory mechanism and system you have created is stronger than our solidarity networks. Long Live Our Trans Solidarity!” Tags: human rights , women Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on LinkedIn Share on Whatsapp Share on Whatsapp 90010 Related Contents “We Want Freedom” campaign launched against repression targeting LGBTI+ people Pozitif Alan: HIV status cannot be grounds for isolation Letter from Nedime Erdoğan, imprisoned in the “My Family is Safe” operation Search In Website To search within the site, you can type the word you want to search with the field below and see the related contents. Social Media © 2026 Kaos GL - News Portal for LGBTI+ | All Rights Reserved.