Visit to Cambodia - Report of the Independent Expert on protection against violence and discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity | United Nations in Cambodia Skip to main content Welcome to the United Nations English ខ្មែរ UN Logo United Nations Cambodia United Nations Cambodia Find UN Data, Resources, News and more... Submit search About About the UN The UN in Cambodia UN Entities in Cambodia The Resident Coordinator Office Our Team in Cambodia Protection from Sexual Exploitation, Abuse, and Sexual Harassment Contact Us Sustainable Development Group Our Work Sustainable Development Goals Take Action Stories Resources Publications Photos Videos Press Centre Press Releases Speeches Media Contacts Events Breadcrumb Home / Resources / Publications / Visit to Cambodia - Report of the Independent Expert on protection against violence and discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity Publication Visit to Cambodia - Report of the Independent Expert on protection against violence and discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity 12 July 2024 In his report, the Independent Expert on protection against violence and discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity, Victor Madrigal-Borloz, provides information on his visit to Cambodia from 10 to 20 January 2023. On the basis of information collected prior to, during and after the visit, the Independent Expert assesses the implementation of existing national and international human rights standards to combat violence and discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity and gives a panoramic view of the human rights situation of lesbian, gay, bisexual and trans and other gender-diverse persons in Cambodia. He identifies good practices and remaining challenges and formulates recommendations to strengthen the protection against violence and discrimination based on sexual orientation and gender identity. The United Nations in Cambodia has prepared an unofficial Khmer translation of the report to support its dissemination and use by national stakeholders. Published by OHCHR Khmer File type: PDF Downloads: 1676 English File type: PDF Downloads: 626 Goals we are supporting through this initiative Related Resources Resources 12 June 2026 Annual Results Report 2025 Resources 10 June 2026 Cambodia Horizon Scan (2026) Resources 07 April 2026 Socio-economic Impact Assessment of Cambodia–Thailand Border Conflict United Nations Cambodia Welcome to the United Nations country team website of Cambodia Footer menu About the UN About the UN Find out what the UN in Cambodia is doing towards the achievement of the Sustainable Development Goals. SDGs SDGs Our work on the Sustainable Development Goals. Take Action Take Action Let's Take Action Towards the Sustainable Development Goals Stories Stories Find out more about our work towards the Sustainable Development Goals. Resources Resources Find out more about our work towards the Sustainable Development Goals. Jobs Jobs Learn about employment opportunities across the UN in Cambodia. facebook-f twitter-x youtube instagram flickr © Copyright 2026 United Nations in Cambodia United Nations Global U.N. menu Contact Copyright Fraud Alert Privacy Notice Site Index Terms of Use