Fernanda Milan, Guatemalan Transgender Woman, Granted Asylum In Denmark | HuffPost Voices Skip to Main Content × Main Menu U.S. Edition News U.S. News World News Business Environment Health Social Justice Crime Politics Congress Extremism Opinion Entertainment Culture & Arts Media Celebrity TV & Film Sports Life Wellness Travel Tech Food & Drink Style & Beauty Family Relationships Money Home & Living Work/Life Shopping Voices Black Voices Queer Voices Latino Voices Indigenous Voices Asian Voices Women's Voices Voices of Disabled People HuffPost Personal Games Horoscopes Video Newsletters International U.S. U.K. España France Ελλάδα (Greece) Italia 日本 (Japan) 한국 (Korea) Follow Us Terms | Privacy Policy Part of HuffPost News. ©2026 BuzzFeed, Inc. All rights reserved. × Loading comments... What's Hot 21 Years of The Huffington Post NEWS POLITICS ENTERTAINMENT LIFE SHOPPING PERSONAL VOICES GAMES Keep Us Loud When the free press comes under fire, HuffPost doesn't back down. Stand with independent journalism — become a member today. Join HuffPost Already a member? Log in to hide these messages. This article is more than 13 years old. See today’s top stories here. Fernanda Milan, Guatemalan Transgender Woman, Granted Asylum In Denmark Denmark's Transgender Milestone By Glennisha Morgan Multimedia journalist, photographer and filmmaker Feb 5, 2013, 11:19 AM EST Leave a Comment A Guatemalan native has become the first transgender person to be granted asylum in Denmark. As the Copenhagen Post reported , Fernanda Milan was granted asylum because she fears persecution in her native country because of her gender identity. Milan says that the Guatemalan police attacked and threatened her because of her transgender activism, reports UPI.com . Milan had initially sought refuge by Flygtningenaevenet, the refugee appeals board, but she was refused. LGBT Denmark then provided documentation that her life would be in danger if she returned to Guatemala and her case was re-opened, according to reports. A press release from the T-Refugee Project Milan states, “I am very grateful to all the people who have helped me to fight, because in the end I could not have done it on my own.” Advertisement Though the T-Refugee Project is happy about Milan's asylum, they're also disgruntled by the lengthy process. “We are very relieved that our struggle, together with Fernanda, ended in her being granted asylum,” Stine Larsen, a spokesperson for the T-Refugee Project, said in the press release . “But it has been a soul-destroying asylum process with an initial refusal which was then reversed just three days before her scheduled departure on September 17.” Last year, a Guatemalan transgender woman named Joselyn was buried alive before fleeing Mexico to seek refuge in Queens, N.Y. She found solace and support through AIDS Center of Queens County , which unites a myriad of transgender Latinas. Advertisement Related transgender rights Transgender asylum denmark lgbt Go to Homepage Leave a Comment Suggest a correction | Submit a tip Advertisement From Our Partner From Our Partner HuffPost Shopping's Best Finds Loading... Newsletter Sign Up The Morning Email Wake up to the day's most important news. Sign up for HuffPost's Morning Email. Successfully Signed Up! Realness delivered to your inbox By entering your email and clicking Sign Up, you're agreeing to let us send you customized marketing messages about us and our advertising partners. You are also agreeing to our Terms of Service and Privacy Policy . Close Trending In Queer Voices More In Queer Voices NEWS POLITICS ENTERTAINMENT LIFE VOICES HUFFPOST PERSONAL SHOPPING NEWSLETTERS About Us Advertise Contact Us RSS FAQ Careers User Agreement Comment Policy DMCA Policy Accessibility Statement Privacy Policy Consent Preferences Privacy Settings Part of HuffPost News. ©2026 BuzzFeed, Inc. All rights reserved. The Huffington Post