China | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview China At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? No Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? No Legal Gender Recognition Possible? No LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? No Last Update: March 12, 2026 China’s approach to LGBTIQ people’s human rights has long been described as “don’t encourage, don’t oppose, don’t promote,” yet increasingly restrictive measures have made advocacy and public discussion more difficult . Through the Cybersecurity Law and related regulations, authorities restrict LGBTIQ-related content deemed to “disrupt social order,” resulting in extensive censorship of online organizing, community support, and public education. In 2025, several gay dating apps were removed from the Apple App Store in China, and prominent queer social media accounts were forced to rebrand or shut down , further weakening digital spaces that had long served as key sites for community connection. Many advocacy organizations had already been forced to close or move underground in previous years, leaving even fewer online spaces for community support and connection. At the same time, the state’s narrow interpretation of “family values” has intensified pressure on sexual and gender minorities to conform to heterosexual and binary gender norms. Conversion practices remain widely available and poorly regulated, and many individuals continue to face coercion from families and society to undergo such practices. Although a 2025 public opinion poll suggested growing support for LGBTIQ people’s rights , particularly among younger people in major cities, these attitudes have not translated into legal protections or structural reform. Cultural expression related to sexual orientation and gender identity has also faced heightened restrictions, including the digital alteration of same-sex wedding scenes in foreign films released in China and the cancellation of an independent Chinese-language film festival in New York following pressure linked to China. Within the judicial system, courts have previously issued rulings favorable to plaintiffs in cases challenging conversion practices , recognizing the harm such practices cause to individuals . These cases briefly drew international media attention but did not lead to broader institutional change. Transgender people continue to face barriers to health care and legal gender recognition, and incidents of homophobic violence, including a reported attack in Zhengzhou , have not resulted in meaningful structural responses. Despite the overall contraction of civic space, rainbow families have achieved limited, symbolic recognition through the courts. In May 2024, a Beijing court ruled for the first time that a child could have two legal mothers . View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International