HRC | Honoring Yella (Robert) Clark Jr., transgender inmate killed in… Cookies in use The Human Rights Campaign uses cookies to improve your site experience. By using this site, you agree to our use of cookies. To learn more, please read our Privacy Policy. Accept More Information Skip to Content Human Rights Campaign Donate Shop Search Menu Human Rights Campaign Donate Shop Search Close Our Work Policy & Politics Electing leaders and demanding policies that protect LGBTQ+ people. Schools Fighting for safer, more inclusive schools for LGBTQ+ students. Community Mobilizing millions in the fight for LGBTQ+ equality. Workplace Setting the standard for LGBTQ+ equality in the workplace. Equality Magazine The nation's largest-circulation LGBTQ+ magazine. Resources LGBTQ+ Resources Resources and tools to educate, support and inspire ourselves and each other. Research & Polling Independent research, data-driven reports, and guides that educate, support, and inspire us all on the journey to LGBTQ+ equality. Corporate Equality Index The Corporate Equality Index provides a research‑based snapshot of LGBTQ+ experiences in U.S. workplaces. Healthcare Equality Index The Healthcare Equality Index is the national LGBTQ+ benchmarking tool that evaluates healthcare facilities' policies and practices. All Reports Explore our full catalog of Digital Reports. Get Involved Memberships Become a member or manage your existing membership, and find other ways to support. Volunteer Volunteers are the backbone of HRC. Join us, no matter how much time you can give. Events Connect with others while playing a role in growing a national movement to secure LGBTQ+ equality. Stay Informed Get the news, alerts, and action opportunities that keep the movement moving. About Who We Are Learn more about us and the Foundation behind us. Our Leadership HRC staff, boards and advisers work tirelessly to ensure progress toward LGBTQ+ equality. Our Supporters All our supporters demonstrate a high level of commitment to equality. News Search Shop Donate News Honoring Yella (Robert) Clark Jr., transgender inmate killed in Louisiana by Shoshana K. Goldberg • June 11, 2024 Share on Bluesky Threads LinkedIn Facebook Email Yella, a 45-year-old Black transgender person, who was serving a life sentence at Angola prison in Louisiana, was killed in a fight with several other inmates on April 2, 2024. Their death is at least the 16th violent killing of a transgender or gender expansive person HRC has learned of in 2024, and the fifth to be killed in the month of April alone. We say “at least” because too often these deaths go unreported — or misreported. The Human Rights Campaign is deeply saddened to report on Yella’s passing. With Yella, misreporting and misgendering in initial reports led to delays in HRC’s own reporting. Most articles referred to them with their birth name and sex assigned at birth, though evidence suggests Clark may have used both Yella and Robert (their birth name) in prison. They identified as transgender, had been diagnosed with gender dysphoria, and had begun taking female hormones to physically transition while incarcerated. We do not know which pronouns they used, or which name they preferred, but we will be using Yella and they/them pronouns throughout the rest of this blog. Yella was incarcerated at Angola prison in Louisiana at the time of their death. Specifical details about the circumstances of their death have not been released; however, news articles, including the Shreveport-Bossier City Advocate , which first noted Yella’s transgender identity, report that Yella and three other inmates “got into an altercation around 10 a.m.” that was stopped by “correctional officers making routine rounds.” Speaking to the Shreveport-Bossier City Advocate , Terrance Winn, a criminal justice reform advocate who was incarcerated alongside Yella, described them as a “loyal and trustworthy person” whose identity led them to be “a target” at Angola, where “that kind of thing (being trans and/or queer) can make things a little bit more dangerous for you.” Unfortunately, Yella’s history at Angola further supports this statement. Though they were initially incarcerated in 2014 for 75 years for armed robbery, in 2018, they were further sentenced to life in prison after killing another inmate, Dolan Franklin. However, in an appeal of this sentence, filed with the Louisiana First Circuit Court of Appeals, Yella and their lawyers alleged that this was done in self-defense, after the inmate in question had raped Yella the day prior, following several weeks of sexual and physical harassment and threats. Though Yella had requested to be moved from the unit where they were housed along with Franklin, the request was initially delayed till the following day. It was during a second attempted rape by Franklin that night, that Yella attacked and killed him. Just two weeks prior to their death, the Court of Appeals denied Yella’s appeal and upheld their life sentence, citing conflicting evidence, and stating that threats and harassment alone were insufficient to justify homicide. Yella was finally living their truth--something that everyone deserves to do, no matter their circumstances. Yet the circumstances of their death, and the harassment and violence faced while incarcerated, show that the system failed them as it does far too often for trans and gender-expansive people." Tori Cooper , Human Rights Campaign Director of Community Engagement for the Transgender Justice Initiative Unfortunately, several of the details of Yella’s death are far too familiar: Since 2013, Yella is the 17th trans or gender-expansive person to die at the hands of law enforcement, and/or while incarcerated. Over 41% of these deaths occurred in the South, and more than half of those killed (56%) were trans women or transfeminine in some way. In an injustice compounding this tragedy, Yella was misgendered in some media and police reports—despite the fact that they testified in court about their transgender identity and were receiving gender-affirming hormones through Angola prison. In the last 11 years that HRC has been tracking fatal violence against the transgender and gender-expansive community, approximately two-thirds of all known victims were misgendered by the media and/or by law enforcement. Anti-transgender stigma is exacerbated by callous or disrespectful treatment by some in the media, law enforcement and elected offices. In the pursuit of greater accuracy and respect, HRC offers guidelines for journalists and others who report on transgender people. HRC, Media Matters and the Trans Journalists Association have also partnered on an FAQ for reporters writing about anti-trans violence. We must demand better from our elected officials and reject harmful anti-transgender legislation at the local, state and federal levels, while also considering every possible way to make ending this violence a reality. It is clear that fatal violence disproportionately affects transgender women of color, especially Black transgender women. The intersections of racism, transphobia, sexism, biphobia and homophobia conspire to deprive them of necessities to live and thrive, so we must all work together to cultivate acceptance, reject hate and end stigma for everyone in the trans and gender-expansive community. More resources: Learn more about the fatal violence cases that HRC is tracking where details are unclear. You may find a list of these cases here . Join HRC's Count Me In campaign to take action for transgender and non-binary people. Read these guidelines and this FAQ for journalists to ensure greater accuracy and respect in reporting. Learn about how transgender and non-binary people are combating transphobia, stigma and anti-trans violence through our Celebrating Changemakers series . Topics: Transgender Related News View All Related News September 23, 2026 | Sam Lau HRC on Wave of Hospital Settlements with Trump Admin: “Nothing less than a crisis for families and transgender youth” August 27, 2026 | HRC Staff HHS Wastes Taxpayer Dollars on Latest Junk Report Trying to Paint Trans Americans as a Threat August 14, 2026 | Delphine Luneau Bogus Trump Administration ‘Report’ Launders Reheated Anti-Trans Rhetoric to Attack Transition Medical Care Love Conquers Hate Donate Today Fall Favorites Shop for HRC clothing and gifts. 100% of every purchase fuels the fight for equality. Shop Now Join millions of supporters by signing up for the HRC newsletter. Email * (Required) Zip code * (5 digits) (Required) Sign Me Up You'll receive email updates from HRC. You can unsubscribe at any time. bluesky instagram threads tiktok linkedin facebook youtube substack Manage Your Membership Adjust your membership details Careers Full-time positions, fellowships and internships Host an Event Our Equality Center is available for events Contact Department contacts, membership inquiries Terms & Conditions Privacy Policy Copyright Complaint Notice The Human Rights Campaign, All Rights Reserved Leaving Site Close You are leaving HRC.org By clicking "GO" below, you will be directed to a website operated by the Human Rights Campaign Foundation, an independent 501(c)(3) entity. Go