Argentina | Outright International Skip to main content Search Outright Menu Our Work Global Programs Reports & Resources United Nations Engagement Country Overviews Policy Briefs Take Action Funding Our Freedom Outright Proud Events Ways to Give Corporate Engagement Insights News and Commentaries Outright Podcast Pride Around the World Celebrating Legal Gender Recognition World Map - Criminalization of Same Sex Conduct and Its Colonial Roots Video Content About Us Our Story Our Purpose 35 Year Timeline Our Financials Donate Country Overview Argentina At a glance Same-sex Relations for Men Legal Throughout the Country? No Same-sex Relations for Women Legal Throughout the Country? No Legal Gender Recognition Possible? No LGBTI Orgs Able to Register? No Last Update: March 12, 2026 For over a decade, Argentina was viewed as a regional leader in terms of LGBTIQ equality and inclusion. Argentina was the first country in Latin America, in 2010, to legalize marriage equality . In 2012, it passed one of the most progressive gender identity laws in the world, allowing individuals to change their legal gender without requiring medical procedures or judicial approval. Antidiscrimination protections exist through national and provincial laws, and Argentina recognizes diverse gender identities, including nonbinary markers, in official documents. The country has also taken steps to address structural inequalities, including implementing employment quotas for trans individuals in the public sector. However, since Javier Milei took office in December 2023, LGBTIQ organizations have documented concrete rollbacks, including the elimination of the Ministry of Women, Gender, and Diversity and the closure of the National Institute Against Discrimination, Xenophobia, and Racism , framed within a broader surge of anti-gender rhetoric . These measures have produced an observable rollback of rights and protections and mark an official retreat from institutional commitments to equality and nondiscrimination. In February 2025, this regression deepened when Milei modified the Gender Identity Law by decree to prohibit minors from accessing gender-affirming health care , including hormone therapy and surgeries, and adopted a decree on the housing of transgender people in prisons , restricting the placement of trans women in women’s wards even after legal gender recognition. Both decrees have been denounced by human rights groups as unlawful setbacks in previously guaranteed rights. LGBTIQ people, particularly transgender individuals, also continue to face discrimination, violence, and barriers to accessing employment, health care, and education. Civil society organizations remain vigilant , advocating for the preservation of hard-won rights and pushing for greater social acceptance and institutional support for LGBTIQ communities. There are no specific laws protecting intersex persons from infant intersex genital mutilation or other harmful medical practices. Conversion practices persist in the country , promoted by religious leaders, mental health professionals, and other public figures, and further legitimized by anti-gender groups that have been gaining ground under the current political climate. View more for this country: Read the Research Browse Insights Global Impact Sub-Saharan Africa Outright supports LGBTIQ organizations in Sub-Saharan Africa and works with mainstream human rights organizations to respect human rights and influence positive changes in laws, policies, attitudes and beliefs that cause discrimination against LGBTIQ people. View this region United Nations Our work at the United Nations centers around advocating for the advancement of the rights of LGBTIQ people. View this region Asia Our work in Asia promotes acceptance of sexual and gender diversity at all levels of society. View this region Southwest Asia and North Africa In the Southwest Asia and North Africa, we partner with local groups in various countries as part of our international solidarity work. We also work with our local partners on different topics through capacity building, advocacy, research and holistic security. View this region Europe and Central Asia Outright International partners with activists to fight for an end to human rights violations based on sexual orientation, gender identity and gender expression in Europe and Central Asia, where most of our work involves emergency responses to harassment, discrimination, violence, and most recently, Russia’s brutal and expanded invasion of Ukraine. View this region Americas Our work in the Americas continues to build on the fundamental and positive transformation of human rights protections in recent years. We partner with groups in the Caribbean that focus on ending gender-based violence and eradicating discrimination against trans people. View this region Pacific Our work in the Pacific aims to increase the visibility of activists, respond to human rights emergencies, and actively bridge local, regional, and international activism to achieve equality and justice. View this region Global View this region Human Rights Research Since 1990, we have partnered with activists from all over the world to produce hundreds of groundbreaking reports. Read Our Reports Outright International works with partners around the globe to strengthen the capacity of the LGBTIQ human rights movement, document and amplify human rights violations, and advocate for inclusion and equality. Donate Ways to Give Publications Legal & Financial Country Overviews Privacy Policy Careers Media Room Newsletter Whistleblower Policy Connect With Us 228 E 45th Street Ground Floor, Box 28 New York, NY 10017 USA +1 212-430-6054 For general inquiries: [email protected] For media inquiries: [email protected] © 2026 Outright International