Malaysia | Human Dignity Trust Your privacy is important to us. We want to be sure you know how and why we use your data. View our Privacy Statement for more details. This also includes information on how we use cookies. Accept News Contact Us Search Twitter Facebook Instagram Human Dignity Trust Donate Menu Home LGBT people & the law Map of Jurisdictions that Criminalise LGBT People A History of LGBT Criminalisation Status of Commonwealth Sexual Offence Laws What We Do Where We Work Strategic litigation Changing Laws, Changing Lives Who We Are Our Team Our Board Our Patrons Legal Panel Bar Panel Commonwealth Group of Experts Our Funders Jobs & Consultancies Support Us Donate Leave a Legacy of Love Corporate Partnerships Trusts and Foundations Resources Videos Search for something Submit search query Search Donate Home LGBT people & the law Expand dropdown Map of Jurisdictions that Criminalise LGBT People A History of LGBT Criminalisation Status of Commonwealth Sexual Offence Laws What We Do Expand dropdown Where We Work Strategic litigation Expand dropdown Belize: A constitutional challenge to the laws criminalising same-sex activity Eastern Caribbean: Constitutional challenges to multiple laws criminalising same-sex activity Sri Lanka: Case before UN Committee on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women (CEDAW) Namibia: Case before the High Court Mauritius: Case before Supreme Court European Union: A case before the Court of Justice Jamaica: Case Decided by the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights Northern Cyprus: Petition before the European Court of Human Rights Singapore: Two separate cases before the Court of Appeal Changing Laws, Changing Lives Expand dropdown Seychelles Penal Code (Amendment) Act 2024 Who We Are Expand dropdown Our Team Our Board Our Patrons Legal Panel Bar Panel Commonwealth Group of Experts Our Funders Jobs & Consultancies Support Us Expand dropdown Donate Leave a Legacy of Love Corporate Partnerships Trusts and Foundations Resources Expand dropdown Videos News Contact Us Twitter Facebook Instagram Malaysia Malaysia criminalises same-sex sexual activity between men and between women. The gender expression of trans people is also criminalised. Sentences include a maximum penalty of twenty years’ imprisonment with whipping. There is evidence of the law being enforced in recent years, and LGBT people are regularly subjected to discrimination and violence. Last updated: 16 December 2025 Types of criminalisation Summary Law and Legal Developments Enforcement Discrimination and Violence Disclaimer Types of criminalisation Criminalises LGBT people Criminalises sexual activity between males Criminalises sexual activity between females Criminalises the gender expression of trans people Summary Same-sex intimacy is prohibited under the Federal Penal Code 1936, which criminalises acts of “carnal knowledge against the order of nature” (sodomy) and “outrages on decency” (gross indecency). These provisions carry a maximum penalty of twenty years’ imprisonment with whipping. Both men and women are criminalised under the Penal Code. Although the law does not expressly criminalise transgender people, the offence of “outrages on decency” can be used to target them. Same-sex intimacy has also been criminalised by state enacted Sharia laws. Such laws only apply to individuals who profess the religion of Islam. Transgender people are also often criminalised under Sharia law enactments, which prohibit, for example, “cross-dressing” or “males posing as females” (and vice versa). Malaysia’s Federal Court has recently ruled unconstitutional criminalising provisions in Sharia criminal code enactments in the states of Selangor and Kelantan. This was on the basis that the state legislature did not have the power to adopt them, as the primary power to legislate criminal law lies with Parliament. This principle has wider application to state enacted Sharia criminal provisions. There is evidence of the law being enforced in recent years. Since the 2018 election a crackdown on the LGBT community has been underway, with several reports of arrest, prosecution, and the imposition of corporal punishment. A high-profile case saw a prominent transgender woman flee the country in 2021 following threats of arrest against her based upon her gender identity. There have been consistent reports of discrimination and violence against LGBT people in recent years, with transgender people being particularly vulnerable to physical and verbal abuse. Law and Legal Developments 2024 In February, the Federal Court declared unconstitutional various sections of the Kelantan Sharia Criminal Code (I) Enactment 2019, including the provision criminalising “sodomy” and other sexual offences that proscribed “sexual intercourse against the order of nature”. The basis of the challenge was that the state legislature did not have the power to enact the challenged provisions. The court held that the offences could apply equally to non-Muslims and Muslims. As such, they were not “religious” offences that the state has power to legislate on and their enactment was accordingly unconstitutional. 2023 In September, the Court of Appeal restored a ban on the book Gay is OK!: A Christian Perspective , which had been quashed by the High Court in a 2022 judgment. The book, authored by Malaysian writer Ngeo Boon Lin, was originally banned by the Home Ministry on the grounds of preserving public order, morality and public interest. The Court of Appeal agreed with the government, stating that freedom of expression may be restricted if necessary for reasons such as public order or morality. 2021 In January, the Deputy Minister in the Prime Minister’s Department (Religious Affairs), Ahmad Marzuk Shaary, suggested that stricter penalties could be imposed on LGBT people, arguing that the current punishments are not harsh enough. The Minister stated that he believed it is necessary to amend the Syariah Courts (Criminal Jurisdiction) Act 1965, which limits the sentences the Sharia courts can impose, to empower them to impose stricter punishments. The Deputy Minister further noted that all state religious enforcement agencies have been instructed to take against LGBT people who don’t “behave accordingly”. In February, a gay man won a landmark court challenge following his arrest and prosecution under section 28 of the Syariah Criminal Offences Enactment 1995 in the state of Selangor, which criminalised “sexual intercourse against the order of nature”. The Federal Court ruled that the state did not have the power to enact the law, holding that the primary power to legislate criminal law lays with Parliament. This is historic. This is monumental for LGBT+ rights in Malaysia. We want to live in dignity without fear of prosecution. Of course Section 377 is still there – it’s not the end but this is a beginning. Numan Afifi, Pelangi Campaign, 2021 Numan Afifi, Pelangi Campaign, 2021 In June, a government taskforce proposed amendments to Sharia law that would allow action to be taken against social media users for insulting Islam and “promoting the LGBT lifestyle”. The proposal was in response to social media posts celebrating pride month. 2014 In November, Malaysia’s Court of Appeal declared a Sharia law provision in the state of Negeri Sembilan, which criminalised “cross-dressing”, as unconstitutional . The Court found that section 66 of the Syariah Criminal Enactment 1992 (Negeri Sembilan) breached various rights as guaranteed by the Malaysian Federal Constitution. However, this landmark decision was overturned by the Federal Court in 2015 on a technicality, citing improper procedures used to challenge the enactment and without considering the substance of the constitutional challenge. In July 2020, the Federal Court dismissed the claimants’ application to appeal, also on procedural grounds. Criminal Provisions Penal Code 1936, Section 377A/377B Unnatural Offences Sections 377A and 377B prohibit “carnal intercourse against the order of nature” with a penalty of up to twenty years imprisonment and whipping. Penal Code 1936, Section 377D Outrages on Decency Section 377D criminalises acts of “gross indecency” with a penalty of up to two years imprisonment. Sexual Offence Law Assessment We’ve also assessed Malaysia’s sexual offence laws against international human rights standards. Not only does Malaysia criminalise same-sex sexual activity and expression of gender identity, it also fails to properly protect other vulnerable groups, such as women and children, from sexual offences. Find out more Enforcement 2025 According to local news reports three men were arrested in Melaka in July by the Melaka Islamic Religious Department (Jaim) and the police, for engaging in same-sex intimacy. The report claims three men were being investigated under Section 56 (sodomy), Section 57 (attempted sodomy) and Section 58 (unnatural sex) under the Syariah Offences (Melaka State) Enactment 1991. According to news reports, on 28 November, over 200 individuals were arrested in Kuala Lumpur in an all-male health centre during a joint enforcement operation by the Kuala Lumpur police, Kuala Lumpur City Hall and the Federal Territories Islamic Religious Department (Jawi) on the premise that “immoral activities were taking place on the premises.” Individuals are being investigated under section 377B of the penal code that criminalise ‘carnal intercourse against the order of nature.’ The Federal Territories Islamic Religious Department (Jawi) continues to investigate the case under Section 25 of the Syariah Criminal Offences (Federal Territories) Act 1997 for sodomy, and Section 47 for attempted offences under the Act. Those detained in Kuala Lumpur were denied access to food, water, medical treatment and were detained for more than 40 hours. Despite their remand applications being dismissed by the Magistrate after the arrest, the police did not allow for the release of the detainees without a bailor. A further media report from 29 November, claims a similar raid was carried out where 13 individuals were arrested in Perai, Penang state , where the police alleged violations of Section 377B of the penal code. 2023 In November, local media reported that the Johor government announced plans to establish conversion therapy centres to “rehabilitate” LGBT people, and stated that these would be fully operational by July 2024. The Malaysian Queer advocacy group, Justice for Sisters likened these plans to torture , and raised concerns about the potential violation of human rights as guaranteed by Malaysia’s Federal Constitution. 2022 In October, Islamic religious police raided a Queer Halloween party in Kuala Lumpur, arresting at least 20 LGBT individuals for “cross-dressing” and “encouraging vice”. Officials report that the arrests were made under the Syariah Criminal Offences (Federal Territories) Act 1997 . Reports suggested that 40 religious officers entered the venue, which held approximately 1,000 participants. Following the raid, Assistant Police Commissioner Noor Dellhan Yahaya vowed to “step up operations and inspections on clubs”. 2021 In February, the Minister for Islamic Affairs called for action to be taken against a prominent transgender entrepreneur, who posted pictures of herself in women’s clothing at a religious event. After she failed to appear in court, Selangor state issued a warrant for her arrest and announced that it was deploying 122 religious affairs officers to detain her. The woman was later revealed to have fled to Thailand where she was granted asylum, despite Malaysian authorities seeking her extradition. Malaysian authorities insisted efforts to return her to Malaysia were not intended to “punish”, but rather to “educate” her. 2019 The US Department of State Country Report on Human Rights Practices noted that in November, the Selangor state Sharia court sentenced five men to six to seven months’ imprisonment, six strokes of the cane, and a fine for “attempting to have intercourse against the order of nature”. One of the accused challenged the power to do so, resulting in the Federal Court invalidating the state Sharia enactment that criminalised same-sex sexual intimacy (see Law and Legal Developments, above). 2018 In May, then opposition leader and current Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim was released from detention after receiving a royal pardon for same-sex sexual conduct, a charge he denied and one viewed internationally as politically motivated. Ibrahim had been in prison since 2015. Following the new government coming into power in May, a serious crackdown on the LGBT community began, and reports of arrests and assaults of LGBT people increased. In August, an LGBT venue was raided and twenty men were arrested. In the same week, a Sharia court in Terengganu state ordered a lesbian couple to be caned, after they were found having sex in a car. This was the first time in years that such a punishment had been handed down. 2015 In June, a Sharia court in the state of Kelantan convicted nine transgender women under section 7 of the Sharia Criminal Code 1985 which prohibited “a male person posing as a woman”. All of the women received fines, and two were sentenced to jail terms of two months. Discrimination and Violence 2023 The Malaysian Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim stated that his government would never recognise LGBT rights. It has been suggested that Ibrahim is under pressure from Islamic groups and the opposition bloc to adopt a strict interpretation of Sharia law. Others have suggested that this stance stems from a desire to remove doubts surrounding Ibrahim’s own sexuality. Justice for Sisters stated that these comments encourage discrimination and violence against LGBT people. In May, the Malaysian government confiscated rainbow-coloured watches produced by Swiss watchmaker Swatch during raids, due to fear of “ promoting ” LGBT . According to multiple press reports in July, the concert of British pop band ‘The 1975’ was halted mid-performance by ‘officials’ after its lead singer, Matty Healy, kissed his fellow band mate on stage after making critical comments about the Malaysian government’s position on same-sex intimacy. The story was widely covered in the international, regional and local press. According to this news report , the three-day Good Vibes Music Festival in Kuala Lumpur, at which they were performing, was cut short and the band were banned from performing again in Malaysia. 2022 A report released by Human Rights Watch and Justice for Sisters examined how government-funded conversion practices contributes to the discrimination and violence faced by LGBT people in Malaysia. State religious “retreats” known as mukhayyam are targeted at Muslim LGBT people to “cure” them of their sexuality. According to the 2022 US Department of State Country Report on Human Rights Practices, at least 1733 persons had attended these “rehabilitation programmes” as of June 2021 . These reports have consistently reported discrimination faced by LGBT people in employment, housing, and access to services on the basis of their sexuality. They have also consistently found that imprisoned transgender women serve their sentences in male prisons. 2018 According to the 2018 US Department of State Country Report on Human Rights Practices, a survey by a local transgender group found that more than two-thirds of transgender women experienced some form of physical or emotional abuse. [The Government will] take proactive measures to curb the growing lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender issues, and help them to return to the right path and lead a normal life. Mujahid Yusof Rawa, Minister for Religious Affairs, 2018 2015 In September, Nisha Ayub, a prominent and internationally recognised transgender rights activist, was assaulted in by two men with iron rods by her house. 2013 In February, an estimated 16,000 parents and teachers attended a seminar on how to curb LGBT behaviour that took place in Politeknik Seberang Prai. After opening the seminar, Malaysia’s then Deputy Education Minister told a press conference: “[homosexuality] is like a disease but it can be cured with early intervention.” References 1. Penal Code 1936, Section 377A/377B Unnatural Offences “377A. Any person who has sexual connection with another person by the introduction of the penis into the anus or mouth of the other person is said to commit carnal intercourse against the order of nature. Explanation – Penetration is sufficient to constitute the sexual connection necessary to the offence described in this section. 377B. Whoever voluntarily commits carnal intercourse against the order of nature shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to twenty years, and shall also be liable to whipping. 377C. Whoever voluntarily commits carnal intercourse against the order of nature on another person without the consent [……] shall be punished with imprisonment for a term of not less than five years and not more than twenty years, and shall also be liable to whipping.” Full text . 2. Penal Code 1936, Section 377D Outrages on Decency “377D. Any person who, in public or private, commits, or abets the commission of, or procures or attempts to procure the commission by any person of, any act of gross indecency with another person, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years.” Full text . Local Organisations PLUHO a LGBTQ organization based in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. Our work focuses on LGBTQ mental health, as well as research and knowledge building. Justice for Sisters a grassroots campaign organised by concerned members of the public to raise public awareness regarding violence, persecution and discrimination against the Mak Nyah (male-to-female transsexual) community in Malaysia. Jejaka a social support group for gay, bisexual and queer Malay/Muslim men. Legal Dignity a human rights organisation that promotes and defends non-discriminatory access to justice for LGBTQI+ persons in Malaysia. Related Countries Myanmar Myanmar criminalises same-sex sexual activity between men. The gender expression of trans people is also criminalised. Sentences include a maximum penalty of ten years’ imprisonment. Indonesia Two provinces of Indonesia criminalise same-sex sexual activity between men and between women. The gender expression of trans people is criminalised under the federal law. Sentences include a maximum penalty of eight years’ imprisonment and 100 lashes. Brunei Brunei criminalises same-sex sexual activity between men and between women. The gender expression of trans people is also criminalised. Sentences include a maximum penalty of death by stoning. Disclaimer The country profiles on the Human Dignity Trust’s website are developed through a combination of in-house expertise and research, including monitoring media reports; sourcing reports from partners and stakeholders; and reviewing reports from governments and other human rights organisations. We go to great lengths to ensure that, to the best of our knowledge, the information provided on our website is correct and up to date. If you believe that any information on our website is inaccurate, you may bring this to our attention by e-mailing [email protected] . Information on this website is provided for general use only and should not be relied on as a definitive position on the law as it applies at any given time. No liability can be accepted for any use of the information in this website and/or links from it. Support our Work Over 60 countries still criminalise LGBT people. Together, we can bring this number down. A donation today will help continue our vital support for LGBT people and governments seeking to change laws around the world. Donate Further Information Next Steps Towards Reform: Assessing good practice and gaps in Commonwealth sexual offences legislation in Asia This report examines the status of sexual offences legislation in Commonwealth Asia, assessing good practice and identifying where there are gaps in protection, with a particular focus on women, children, LGBT+ people and people with disability. Human Dignity Trust condemns Brunei’s brutal new Islamic Penal Code Death penalty among a range of punishments to be introduced for same-sex activity UN rules that criminalisation of same-sex intimacy between women violates key rights treaty Major legal precedent could affect millions of lesbian & bisexual women Sign up to receive updates Join our newsletter to receive regular updates about decriminalisation efforts around the world, including breaking news on key legal cases, hot off the press reports, invitations to events and messages from our Chief Executive. SIGN UP We use the law to defend the human rights of LGBT people globally. Twitter Facebook Instagram Human Dignity Trust, 4th Floor West - Quality House 5-9 Quality Court, Chancery Lane, London WC2A 1HP, United Kingdom Copyright © 2026 . All Rights Reserved. Registered charity in England and Wales (No. 1158093) Charity web design by Fat Beehive Sitemap Accessibility Privacy Notice & Cookies Policy Home LGBT people & the law What We Do Who We Are Support Us Resources Donate Make a one time donation Phone This field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged. Single Donation This form will create a one time donation of Title - select - Mr Mrs Miss Ms Mx Dr Rev Name * First Last Address Line 1 * Address Line 2 Town / City * Postcode * Country Email * Email Confirm Email Phone Gift Aid opt-in I am a UK taxpayer. Please enable Gift Aid on my donation Consent * I agree to the privacy policy . I have read and understood the Human Dignity Trust's policy on how my information is used (link opens in a new tab/window) Keep in touch Yes, I would like to receive news from the Human Dignity Trust about how my donation is making a difference. Submit CLOSE Make a monthly donation by subscription Monthly Donation This form will create a monthly subscription of Title - select - Mr Mrs Miss Ms Mx Dr Rev Name * First Last Address Line 1 * Address Line 2 Town / City * Postcode * Country Email * Email Confirm Email Phone Gift Aid opt-in I am a UK taxpayer. Please enable Gift Aid on my donation Consent * I agree to the privacy policy . I have read and understood the Human Dignity Trust's policy on how my information is used (link opens in a new tab/window) Keep in touch Yes, I would like to receive news from the Human Dignity Trust about how my donation is making a difference. Submit CLOSE Make a one time donation Company This field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged. Single Donation This form will create a one-off donation of Title - select - Mr Mrs Miss Ms Mx Dr Rev Name * First Last Address Line 1 * Address Line 2 Town / City * Postcode * Country Email * Enter Email Confirm Email Phone Gift Aid opt-in I am a UK taxpayer. Please enable Gift Aid on my donation Consent * I agree to the privacy policy . I have read and understood the Human Dignity Trust's policy on how my information is used (link opens in a new tab/window) Keep in touch I would like to receive news from the Human Dignity Trust about how my donation is making a difference. Submit CLOSE Make a monthly donation by subscription Email This field is for validation purposes and should be left unchanged. Monthly Donation This form will create a monthly subscription of Title - select - Mr Mrs Miss Ms Mx Dr Rev Name * First Last Address Line 1 * Address Line 2 Town / City * Postcode * Country Email * Email Confirm Email Phone Gift Aid opt-in I am a UK taxpayer. Please enable Gift Aid on my donation Consent * I agree to the privacy policy . I have read and understood the Human Dignity Trust's policy on how my information is used (link opens in a new tab/window) Keep in touch Yes, I would like to receive news from the Human Dignity Trust about how my donation is making a difference. Submit CLOSE