A List of Essential Laws Every LGBTQ+ Filipino Needs to Know Get Magazine Newsletter Search Magazine Digital Print Where to buy Category Music Discover the latest in music, from breaking news, in-depth reviews, artist interviews, top album, and song lists, covering the best in the music world. Music Reviews Live Reviews Dance/Electronic Indie Folk Rock Hip-hop/R&B Pop Culture Reviews Philippine Cinema Internet Culture Film Art Books Food Sports TV Tech State of Affairs Philippine Politics Environment LGBTQ+ Artificial Intelligence Disinformation Labor Radar Weekend Guide RS Recommends RS Spotlight Events Releases Style Tech Media Channels RSPH Interview Greatest Hits Gatekeeper Guerilla Report Editor's Picks Features Opinion Commentary Q&A Lists The Rolling Stone Interview Songs You Need To Know What To Watch Right Now Store & Newsletter Signup Newsletter Music State of Affairs Culture Radar Magazine Digital Print Where to buy Search Magazine Digital Print Where to buy Category Music Discover the latest in music, from breaking news, in-depth reviews, artist interviews, top album, and song lists, covering the best in the music world. Music Reviews Live Reviews Dance/Electronic Indie Folk Rock Hip-hop/R&B Pop Culture Reviews Philippine Cinema Internet Culture Film Art Books Food Sports TV Tech State of Affairs Philippine Politics Environment LGBTQ+ Artificial Intelligence Disinformation Labor Radar Weekend Guide RS Recommends RS Spotlight Events Releases Style Tech Media Channels RSPH Interview Greatest Hits Gatekeeper Guerilla Report Editor's Picks Features Opinion Commentary Q&A Lists The Rolling Stone Interview Songs You Need To Know What To Watch Right Now Store & Newsletter Signup Newsletter Advertisement Home › State of Affairs › Politics Politics Laws That LGBTQ+ Filipinos Need to Know While a few laws take the rights of LGBTQ+ Filipinos into consideration, the Philippines still lacks a robust, comprehensive, and SOGIE-based anti-discrimination law By Pie Gonzaga February 07, 2025 Advocates rally at the EDSA People Power Monument to support the passage of the SOGIE Equality Bill, March 17, 2018. Photo by Gil Calinga/Philippine News Agency This year marks the 25th anniversary of the Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Expression (SOGIE) Equality Bill — and consequently, 25 years of inaction from the legislature to protect LGBTQ+ Filipinos from various forms of discrimination. Its first iteration was filed by the late former Senator Miriam Defensor-Santiago and former Akbayan Representative Etta Rosales in 2000, and was followed by many other versions filed in succeeding congresses. And because the latest version — filed August 2023 — was not passed into law, one can expect another version to be filed in the 20th Congress, which convenes after the midterm elections. The Philippines also lacks legislation to accommodate sex change in official documents without a judicial order, and still does not recognize same-sex unions. Local government units (LGUs) have already enacted ordinances to protect their constituents from SOGIE-based discrimination, like provinces of Albay, Agusan del Norte, Bataan, Batangas, Cavite, the Dinagat Islands, Ilocos Sur, and Iloilo, and 32 cities and municipalities nationwide. For now, a few other national laws are in place to protect LGBTQ+ Filipinos, but their small number and narrow scope highlight the need for a robust, comprehensive, and SOGIE-focused anti-discrimination law. Whether or not the Philippines sees the SOGIE Equality Bill passed into law now will depend on the lawmakers elected in May. Magna Carta for Public Social Workers Section 17 of the Magna Carta for Public Social Workers states that public social workers have the right to protection from discrimination on the grounds of “sex, sexual orientation, age, political or religious beliefs, civil status, physical characteristics/disability or ethnicity.” Section 24 sets penalties for violation of the Magna Carta’s provisions, including the one above. Harassment and discrimination of a public social worker on the basis of their SOGIE is punishable with a fine of P20,000 to P40,000, and/or imprisonment for up to a year. Magna Carta of Women The Magna Carta of Women states that the government shall recognize and protect the rights and freedoms of women “without distinction or discrimination on account of class, age, sex, gender, language, ethnicity, religion, ideology, disability, education, and status.” Violations of the Magna Carta’s provisions are punished according to the penalties set by other existing laws like the Anti-Violence Against Women and Their Children Act. These penalties are, of course, reserved for harassment against women and children. There are no specific provisions in the Magna Carta for LGBTQ+ women. Safe Spaces Act The Safe Spaces Act is by far the only national legislation that names specific violations against LGBTQ+ Filipinos. The law penalizes acts of harassment in public spaces, including cursing, catcalling, leering, and taunting, as well as the use of misogynistic, transphobic, homophobic, and sexist slurs, and the use of words, gestures, or actions that ridicule on the basis of SOGIE. Penalties for violating the Safe Spaces Act include fines of P1000 to P10,000, depending on the number of offenses, imprisonment of up to 30 days, and attendance to a gender sensitivity seminar to be conducted by the Philippine National Police. Provisions of the Revised Penal Code The Revised Penal Code (RPC) is also valuable to protecting LGBTQ+ Filipinos. Article 353 defines libel as “public and malicious imputation of a crime, or of a vice or defect, real or imaginary, or any act, omission, condition, status, or circumstance tending to cause the dishonor, discredit, or contempt of a natural or juridical person, or to blacken the memory of one who is dead.” Hate speech and threats to an individual may be considered libelous or defamatory. According to Article 355, libel may be punished by “prision correccional in its minimum and medium periods” — one month and one day to six months of imprisonment — or a fine ranging from P200 to P6,000. Abuses of the Law However, the RPC can also be weaponized against LGBTQ+ Filipinos. In October 2023, drag artist Pura Luka Vega was arrested for allegedly breaching Article 201, which penalizes “Immoral Doctrines, Obscene Publications, and Exhibitions.” The Manila police, who arrested Vega, acted on a complaint from the Hijos del Nazareno, who found Vega’s lip sync performance of an “Ama Namin” rock remix “immoral.” Pura Luka Vega at a court in Quezon City to submit final pleadings for criminal complaints filed against them there, September 18, 2023. Photo from Pura Luka Vega Instagram Earlier, in 2010, the Commission on Elections (Comelec) initially denied the accreditation of Ladlad, an LGBTQ+ political party, citing Article 201 and stating that Ladlad promoted “immorality.” The Supreme Court overturned Comelec’s decision, allowing Ladlad to register as a political party. Article 202, penalizing “vagrants and prostitutes,” was also used against transgender women. According to a 2015 study on the social experiences of trans people in the Philippines, police would arrest transgender women in the Philippines on vagrancy charges and extort them for money or sexual favors in exchange for freedom. Due to these abuses, vagrancy was decriminalized in 2012. Recommended Video Tap to Unmute Replay Unmute 0:00 0:00 / 0:00 0:00 Pie Gonzaga Culture Writer Pie Gonzaga is the Culture Writer of Rolling Stone Philippines, primarily covering film, TV, food, and internet culture. Gonzaga has worked on a range of stories for print and digital formats, from an interview with Cardinal Ambo David to features on queer party organizers such as CHURCH and Club Euphoria. Her work as the magazine’s former State of Affairs Writer includes news updates on pressing issues like the flood control scandal and the missing sabungeros, and covering rallies. Under Culture, she’s written episode recaps for hit shows, film reviews, and features on restaurants and the people who run them. Before working with Rolling Stone Philippines, she contributed lifestyle and entertainment stories for a digital news platform. See more stories by Pie Gonzaga In This Article: Gender Issues LGBTQIA+ Latest Articles A Night Out Madonna and Charli XCX Meet in the Club on ‘Danceteria Afterhours’ By Elijah Pareño September 25, 2026 Free At Last 16 Years Later, Mary Jane Veloso Can Finally Walk Free By Reyza Ferranco September 25, 2026 Watchlist Best Films of 2026 So Far: ‘Forgotten Island,’ ‘The Odyssey,’ and More By Pie Gonzaga September 25, 2026 Free Viewing Docu Film on Israeli AI Killing Machine, ‘NAZA,’ to Stream Online for Free this November By Elijah Pareño September 25, 2026 Country Crossover Ella Langley Just Dethroned Mariah Carey’s Longest Stint at No. 1 With ‘Choosin’ Texas’ By Elijah Pareño September 24, 2026 Latest Issue Rolling Stone Philippines Voices Issue, Now Available at SariSari Shopping Get Now Advertisement You might also like A Night Out Madonna and Charli XCX Meet in the Club on ‘Danceteria Afterhours’ By Elijah Pareño September 25, 2026 Free At Last 16 Years Later, Mary Jane Veloso Can Finally Walk Free By Reyza Ferranco September 25, 2026 Watchlist Best Films of 2026 So Far: ‘Forgotten Island,’ ‘The Odyssey,’ and More By Pie Gonzaga September 25, 2026 Free Viewing Docu Film on Israeli AI Killing Machine, ‘NAZA,’ to Stream Online for Free this November By Elijah Pareño September 25, 2026 GET THE MAGAZINE Rolling Stone About Us Contact Us Newsletter The Team Where to buy Glossary Category Culture A broader look at disciplines beyond music where genius thrives, covering established and emerging niches, and figures pushing boundaries with their craft. Editor's Picks Music Discover the latest in music, from breaking news, in-depth reviews, artist interviews, top album, and song lists, covering the best in the music world. Radar State of Affairs Make sense of the world with long-form investigative reporting, op-eds, in-depth profiles of people in power, recaps, and deep dives on the biggest social issues. Digital Access Legal Privacy Policy Cookie Settings Ad Preferences Cookie Policy Digital Access FAQs Terms and conditions Follow Us Facebook Instagram X TikTok Pinterest The views and opinions expressed by the subjects, interviewees, and contributors, are solely their own and do not necessarily reflect those of Rolling Stone Philippines, Modern Media Group Inc., and AGC Power Holdings Inc. © 2026 Rolling Stone Philippines is published and presented by Modern Media Group, Inc. - a subsidiary of AGC Power Holdings Corp. All rights reserved. To provide a customized ad experience, we need to know if you are of legal age in your region. By making a selection, you agree to our Terms & Conditions . I am of legal age I am not ×